International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 45– No.5, May 2012 
47 
A Survey on Association Rule Mining using Apriori 
Algorithm
K.Saravana Kumar 
Ph.D Research Scholar 
NGM College, 
Pollachi. 
 
 
R.Manicka Chezian 
Associate Professor 
NGM College, 
Pollachi. 
ABSTRACT  
Association rule mining is the most important technique in the 
field of data mining. It aims at extracting interesting 
correlation, frequent pattern, association or casual structure 
among set of item in the transaction database or other data 
repositories. Association rule mining is used in various areas 
for example Banking, department stores etc. The paper 
surveys the most recent existing association rule mining 
techniques using apriori algorithm.  
Keywords 
 Association rule mining, Ant colony optimization, E-mail 
detection, Database Reverse Engineering.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Association rule discovery from large databases is one of the 
tedious tasks in data mining. Suspicious e-mails are detected 
in two ways. Informative e-mails and alert     e-mails. 
Informative e-mails give information about past criminal 
activities and Alert e-mails gives alert about future criminal 
activities using apriori algorithm. ACO algorithm gives the 
specific problem of minimizing the number of association 
rules [3]. Apriori algorithm uses transaction data set and uses 
a user interested support and confidence value and produce 
the association rule set. These association rule sets are discrete 
and continue therefore weak rule set are required to prune. 
Finally, conclude the paper. 
2. RELATED WORKS 
Determination of association rule mining, e-mail (emails 
about criminal activity) is suspected. Negative emotion words 
betray theory, a new person pronoun, in addition to simple 
words, the high-frequency words and special words were 
written in the body is characterized by deceptive e-mail 
writing preprocessed. Terms of apriori algorithm [1] is used to 
make. Data generated in the mail soon. It is used for 
automated analysis and evaluation to identify criminal 
activities and the announcement. Apriori algorithm for 
association rule mining, and all e-mail messages using the 
action verbs, past tense, using futures and evaluated. It's an 
action verb, such kind of emails in the future tense suffix and 
another with a message by e-mail if you are suspicious. 
Warning email to "“kill and bomb” future tense of words such 
as "“will and shall," which refers to such terms. Step number. 
In order to classify the e-mail box, all HTML from the text 
element, header, body, etc removed, before the words are stop 
words tokenizing. After separation of the body, begins to 
move e-mail classification. Training data “Bomb/Blast/Kill " 
key and " will/may " they, important that the class 
information, e-mails, a move “attacked/terrorist” and tense 
“was” in them using apriori algorithm.. The training set 
apriori algorithm to find the e-mail database of words 
frequently used in the mining frequent item sets. Apriori 
algorithm for association rules and the rules used to set this 
item as follows. 
Tense=past, Attack= Y, Bomb =Y ->Email = Suspicious 
informative Email. 
Tense=future, Attack= Y, Bomb =Y-> Email =Suspicious 
alert Email. 
Tense=future, Attack= N, Bomb =N->Email =Normal Email. 
An improved frequent pattern tree based on the technique 
named dynamic frequent pattern tree is proposed by Gyorodi 
[2]. The new method is efficiently applied on real world size 
database. A comparison between classical frequent pattern 
mining algorithms that are candidate set generation, test and 
without candidate generation is proposed in paper. Apriori 
algorithm, frequent pattern growth, dynamic frequent pattern 
growth are compared and presented together. Apriori 
algorithm in used to rule mining in huge transaction database 
and Apriori algorithm is a bottom up approach. Frequent 
pattern growth is used to novel, compact data structure, 
referred to as frequent pattern tree, fp tree based ones are 
partition based, divide and conquer methods. 
Optimization of association rule mining and apriori algorithm 
Using Ant colony optimization [3].This paper is on Apriori 
algorithm and association rule mining to improved algorithm 
based on the Ant colony optimization algorithm. ACO was 
introduced by dorigo and has evolved significantly in the last 
few years. Many organizations have collected massive amount 
data. This data set is usually stored on storage database 
systems. Two major problems arise in the analysis of the 
information system. One is reducing unnecessary objects and 
attributes so as to get the minimum subset of attributes 
ensuring a good approximation of classes and an acceptable 
quality of classification. Another one is representing the 
information system as a decision table which shows 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 45– No.5, May 2012 
48 
dependencies between the minimum subset of attributes and 
particular class numbers without redundancy.  In Apriori 
algorithm, is working process explained in steps. Two step 
processes is used to find the frequent item set to join and 
prune. ACO algorithm was inspired from natural behavior of 
ant colonies. ACO is used to solve to numerous hard 
optimizations including the traveling salesman problem. ACO 
system contains two rules .One is local pheromone update 
rule, which is applied in constructing solution. Another one is 
global pheromone update rule which is applied in ant 
construction.ACO algorithm includes two more mechanisms, 
namely trail evaporation and optionally deamonactions.ACO 
algorithm is used for the specific problem of minimizing the 
number of association rules. Apriori algorithm uses 
transaction data set and uses a user interested support and 
confidence value then produces the association rule set. These 
association rule set is discrete and continues. Hence weak rule 
set are required to prune.  
Association rule mining template is guided from XML 
document. XML is used in all areas of Internet application 
programming and is giving large amount of data encoded in 
XML [4]. With the continuous growth in XML data sources, 
the ability to extract knowledge from them for decision 
support becomes increasingly important and desirable. Due to 
the inherent flexibilities of XML, in both structure and 
semantics, mining knowledge in the XML Era is faced with 
more challenges than in the traditional structured world. This 
paper is a practical model for mining association rules from 
XML document.XML enabled association rule frame work 
that was introduced by Feng.XML AR frame works better 
than simple structured tree. The framework is flexible and 
powerful enough to represent simple and difficult structured 
association rules in XML document. But the best level of 
XML document model which is not yet implemented in has 
been proposed. The problem of mining XML association rules 
from the content of XML documents is based on user 
provided rule template. An implementation model is already 
introduced by Feng. Our practical model consists of the 
following steps Filtering, Generating Virtual Transactions, 
Finding Association Rules, Converting extracted rules of 
XML AR rules and Visualizing.  Filtering and Generating 
virtual transactions are most important steps in this model 
Filtering step uses the XML-AR template and extracts only 
those parts of XML that are interesting for the user. The next 
step, defining a transaction context, based on tag nesting in 
XML document uses to generate virtual transactions that can 
be used as input format by association rule mining algorithms 
(e.g. Apriori). As an example, consider the problem of mining 
frequent associations among people who appear as coauthors, 
with our XML-AR template formulate. The statement is two 
parts|(body and head) and the each part has 3-level xml 
fragment display generated virtual transactional based on 
XML AR template and xml fragment of dblp collection. The 
experimental results have found the coauthors and the 
keyword relationship, mining from xml document. 
Database reverse engineering association rule mining [5] is 
based on. Classification of the document database system 
could not be found in the poorly written, or even a particularly 
difficult task. The concept design of database reverse 
engineering to recover the database in an attempt to exit. 
Mining technique to detect the use of the concept plan 
proposing a strategy paper. They used the normal form. 
Classical database is a valuable asset to the organization. New 
technologies were developed in 1970 as a COBOL and the 
database, and mini - computer platforms, file systems using 
older programming languages. Even some of the databases are 
outdated concepts such as the hierarchical data model, 
designed, and maintained and adjusted to serve the current 
needs of modern companies was difficult for them. Classical 
databases, messaging systems and their structures are related 
to the contents of the move and changing. This document is 
no longer in my approach to system design, however, is hard 
to achieve; most companies in general are rising. Problems of 
migrating legacy databases to retrieve and database structures, 
database reverse engineering has been proposed. Reverse 
engineering process design and manufacturing process from 
the first to explore the objective devices and other hardware. 
This method is often used in World War II. Databases in real 
life mining association rules in applying the huge amount but 
it always creates a major problem. We select only the strong 
association rules, including the law of the filter element 
design. To find lost documents in database design and 
normalization policies and association mining techniques. 
Using formal analysis techniques for database reverse 
engineering process to improve design and builds. NoWARs 
(Normalization rules) means that a new analytical technique 
used to create a formal opinion and communication. Formal 
process and technology together to enable NoWars a means of 
union. Process a data mining association rules in a database 
and the dataset can be fed. Call to implement apriori 
algorithm to discover association rules and by NoWARs 
association rules in a database can save a form as a result. 
NoWARs normalization process used in the selection rules. 
Finally, the rules related to use program to create a table in the 
form of 3NF. Conceptual Schema and the power efficiency in 
the execution and analysis to filter out and recover. NoWARs 
maintains a database.Frequent Pattern - Classification: 
Generalized association rule mining based on tree structure. 
Into account [6] the use of specific information useful 
knowledge than ordinary flat association rules mining to 
detect this possibility. It employs a tree structure to compress 
the database Fp-line method, based on the paradigm 
proposing to mine development. There are two methods to the 
study of tree structure below and above are below. There are 
only a few studies have given way to common rules. Even 
some of the SQL queries and reports to the general association 
rule proposed parallel machine performance ratings. Apriori 
algorithm is a level-wise approach. A frequent pattern mining 
paradigm in the field of research has become a new trend. 
Often times, or to divide the so-called examples of successful 
development. Fp-growth algorithm is successful predecessor. 
Fp-Fp-growth trees that are often forms of devices to a data 
structure that collects all the required information. FP-tree 
traversal algorithm is the bottom line is above the upper fp-
line and used to travel down and bottom up traversal methods 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 45– No.5, May 2012 
49 
differ. Step three optimizations, such as the ancestors of 
transactions included in the overall filter, pre-computing the 
ancestors and the ancestors of an item is an item set, and 
pruning. With the apriori algorithm based on association rule 
mining algorithms based on common trees. The traversal of 
the tree structure below and above the bottom up traversal 
times worked construction.Efficient association rules mining 
properties by using the apriori algorithm. Apriori algorithm to 
obtain the means of association rules from the dataset. It's [7] 
the case of a large dataset is a time consuming procedure 
apriori algorithm is an efficient algorithm. Time changes 
many long-term activities to increase the number of paths 
apriori and the proposed database. Disadvantages and apriori 
algorithm apriori algorithm can improve performance; this 
paper describes the application properties. Customers who 
buy products at the beginning of an association rule mining is 
market basket analysis to find out how.Minimum support of 
all frequent items finding all association rules atuvallatu 
1.Find they considered the two-stage process. Enumeration of 
all frequent item sets the size of the search space is 2n. 2. To 
create strong rules. Used to create an association rule that 
satisfies any of the gate.Apriori and apriori algorithm using 
data mining tool and then running to write pseudo code. 
Association rule mining is the limit. ARM algorithm 
encounters a problem that does not return by the end user in a 
reasonable time. Activity in the presence and absence of an 
item is the only database that tells us a lot of shortcomings, 
and it is not efficient in the case of large dataset.ARM. The 
weight and size can be removed using such properties. Some 
of the limitations associated with large database apriori 
algorithm  
Searches. Its easy to implement using apriori exists. 
Association rule mining as well as potential customers for 
commercial gain valuable information, much improved by the 
use of such properties. Association rule mining has wide 
applicability in many areas, efficient algorithm as it is a time 
consuming algorithm in case of large dataset [7]. With the 
time a number of changes are proposed in Apriori to enhance 
the performance in term of time and number of database 
passes. This paper illustrates the apriori algorithm 
disadvantages and utilization of attributes which can improve 
the efficiency of apriori algorithm. Association rule mining is 
initially used for Market Basket Analysis to find how items 
purchased by customers are related. The problem of finding 
association rules can be stated as follows: Given a database of 
sales transactions, it is desirable to discover the important 
associations among different items such the presence of some 
items in a transaction will imply the presence of other items in 
the same transaction . Discovering all association rules is 
considered as two-phase processes which are 1.Find all 
frequent item sets having minimum support. The search space 
to enumeration all frequent item sets is on the magnitude of 
2n. 2. Generate strong rules. Any association that satisfies the 
threshold will be used to generate an association rule. The 
first phase in discovering all association rules is considered to 
be the most important one because it is time consuming due to 
the huge search space (the power set of the set of all items) 
and the second phase can be accomplished in a straight 
forward manner. Then write the pseudo code for apriori and 
working of apriori algorithm using data mining tool. 
Limitation of association rule mining. The end user of ARM 
encounter problem as the algorithm does not return in a 
reasonable time. It is only tells the presence and absence of an 
item transactional database and it is not efficient in case of 
large dataset.ARM has a lot of disadvantages. These can be 
removed by using attributes like weight and quantity. Weight 
attribute will give user an estimate of how much quantity of 
item has been purchased by the customer, profit attribute will 
calculate the profit ratio and tell total amount of profit an item 
is giving to the customer. Apriori algorithm is associated with 
certain limitations of large database  
scans. Advantage of apriori is its easy implementation. 
Association rule mining efficiency can be improved by using 
attributes like profit, quantity which will give the valuable 
information to the customer as well as the business. 
Association rule mining has a wide range of applicability in 
many areas 
3. DATABASE REVERSE 
ENGINEERING 
Legacy databases are important assets to organizations. 
However these databases were mostly developed using 1970‟s 
technologies and hence is difficult to adapt to the current 
needs of modern companies. Maintenance of these legacy 
databases is very difficult mainly, due to the lack of proper 
system documentation. So in-order to ease the process of 
maintaining these legacy databases the concept of Database 
reverse Engineering arose. Database reverse engineering 
solves the problem of recovering database structure and 
migrating legacy database. Database reverse engineering 
refers to the process of discovering the source code as well as 
the system design of the given software. To reverse engineer a 
database is, to discover the underling relations between 
various records and tables such as the keys, functional 
dependencies and integrity constraints. Typically this means 
applying association mining to a database, but in real life 
databases this leads to the generation of a tremendous amount 
of association rules.  Apply the normalization principles and 
association mining techniques to discover the missing 
database design. To control the number of associations 
another more efficient technique named „NoWARs‟ 
(Normalization With association Rules), which uses the 
Apriori algorithm, was developed. The NoWARs technique 
user the concept of normalization and the concept of 
association, it consists of two important steps: finding the 
rules of association and then normalizing those rules.  The 
algorithm NoWARs starts when used enter query to define 
dataset to normalize. Then NoWARs will find the association 
rules by calling Apriori algorithm and save resulting a form of 
association rules in the database. Then NoWARs will select 
some rules to use in normalization process. Finally, use the 
selected rules to generate the 3NF in relational schema form. 
NoWARs are normalizing the database tables. In the 
normalization process, NoWARs uses only 100% confidence 
association rules with any support values.   Recent work in 
database reverse engineering has not concentrated on a broad 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 45– No.5, May 2012 
50 
objective of system migration; instead focus is made on a 
particular issue of semantic understanding. Reverse 
engineering method to discover inter-relational constraints 
and inheritances embedded in a relational database. 
4. CONCLUSION 
Association rule mining has a wide range of applicability such 
as market basket analysis, suspicious e-mail detection, library 
management and many areas. The conventional algorithm of 
association rules discovery proceeds in two steps. All frequent 
item sets are found in the first step. The frequent item set is 
the item set that is included in at least minimum support 
transactions. The association rules with the confidence at least 
minimum confident are generated in the second step. In this 
paper, we surveyed the list of existing association rule mining 
techniques using apriori algorithm. 
5. REFERENCES 
 [1] S.Appavu alias Balamurugan, Aravind , Athiapppan,  
Barathiraja, Muthu Pandian and Dr.R.Rajaram,” 
Association rule mining for suspicious Email detection:A 
data mining approach” l1-4244-1l330-3/07/$25.OO 
02007 IEEE.                                                  
[2] Cornelia Győrödi, Robert Győrödi, T. Cofeey & S. Holban 
– ”Mining association rules using Dynamic FP-trees” – 
în proceedings of The Irish Signal and Systems 
Conference, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland, 
30th June-2nd July 2003, ISBN 0-9542973-1-8, pag. 76-
82.  
 [3] Badri patel ,Vijay K Chaudahri,Rajneesh  K Karan,YK 
Rana  --“Optimization of association rule mining  apriori 
algorithm using  Ant Conoly optimization” International 
Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering (IJSCE) 
ISSN: 2231-2307, Volume-1, Issue-1, March 2011 
[4] Rahman AliMohammadzadeh, Sadegh Aoltan, Masoud 
Rahgozar –“Template Guided Association Rule   Mining 
from XML Documents” WWW 2006, May 23–26, 2006, 
Edinburgh, Scotland.ACM 1-59593-323-9/06/0005. 
 [5]  Nattapon Pannurat, Nittaya Kerdprasop,  Kittisak 
Kerdprasop –“Database Reverse Engineering based on 
Association Rule Mining” IJCSI International Journal of 
Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 3, March 
2010 ISSN (Online): 1694-0784ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
[6] Iko Pramudiono and masaru Kitsuregawa  - “FP-tax :Tree 
structure Generalized Association Rule Mining” DMKD 
‟04, June 13, 2004, Paris, France Copyright 2004 ACM 
ISBN 158113908X/04/06 ...$5.00. 
[7] Mamta Dhanda, sonali Guglani and gaurav gupta –
“Mining Efficient Association Rules through Apriori 
Algorithm Using Attributes” IJCST Vol. 2, Issue 3, 
September 2011 I S S N : 2 2 2 9 - 4 3 3 3 ( P r i n t ) | I S 
S N : 0 9 7 6 - 8 4 9 1 (On l i n e ) 
[8] J. Han, M. Kamber, “Data Mining Concepts and 
Techniques”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San 
Francisco, USA, 2001, ISBN 1558604898. 
[9] L. Cristofor, “Mining Rules in Single-Table and Multiple-
Table Databases”,PhD thesis, University of 
Massachusetts, 2002. 
[10] Ashoka Savasere, Edward Omiencinski, and Shamkant 
B. Navathe. “AnEfficient Algorithm for Mining 
Association Rules in Large Databases.” InProceedings of 
the 21st International Conference on Very Large 
Databases, pag432 - 444, 1995. 
 
