Abstract:  This paper presents the  method of mining the data and which contains the information about  the large information about the PR (Panchayat Raj Department) of Orissa .we have focused some of the   techniques ,approaches and  different  methodology’s  of the demand forecasting .Every organizations are operated  in different places of the country. Each place of operation may generate a huge amount of data. In an organization, worker prediction is the difficult task of the manager. It is the complex process not only because its nature of feature prediction but also various approaches methodologies always makes user confused. This paper aims to deal with the problem selection process.In this paper we have used some of the approaches from literatures are been introduced and analyzed to find its suitable organization and situation, Based on this we have designed with automatic selection function to help users make a prejudgment The information about each approach will be showed to users with examples to help understanding. This system also provides calculation function to help users work out a predication result. Generally the new developed system has a more comprehensive functions compared with existing ones .It aims to improve the accuracy of demand forecasting by implementing the forecasting algorithm. While it is still a decision support system with no ability of make the final judgment. .The data warehouse is used in the significant business value by improving the effectiveness of managerial decision-making. In an uncertain and highly competitive business environment, the value of strategic information systems such as these are easily recognized however in today’s business environment, efficiency or speed is not the only key for competitiveness. This type of huge amount of data’s are available in the form of tera- to peta-bytes which has drastically changed in the areas of science and engineering. To analyze, manage and make a decision of such type of huge amount of data we need techniques called the data mining which will transforming in many fields. We have implemented the algorithms in JAVA technology. This paper provides the prediction algorithm (Linear Regression, result which will helpful in the further research.  Keywords  Data Mining, Classification Based on the Data Mining, Data Mining Forecasting Technique    International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012   20  1.  INTRODUCTION  Data mining is the most important research domain in the 21st century. The objective is to extract the regularities from a huge amount of data .For this purpose some efficient techniques have been proposed like the appriori algorithm.   Forecasting is very important for prediction of the feature events .Science and computer technology together has made significant advances over the past several years and using those advanced technologies and few past patterns, it grows the ability to predict the future .Feature prediction is a process of choosing the best subset of the features available from the selected input data .The best subset contains the minimum number of dimensions that contribute more accuracy.  Accurate demand forecasting remains difficult and challenging in 21st century which is a competitive and dynamic business environment .A little bit improvement in the regard which may gives the significant result   to the worker as well manager of an organization. .It aims to improve the accuracy of demand forecasting by implementing the forecasting algorithm. It is a key business function for an organization and employeers (workers).the majority of an organization (PR Dept) still conduct demand forecasting using outdated, often homegrown systems that lack forecasting algorithms and analytical tools [1].Worker demand in an organization can depend upon various attributes such as size related factors and information about different departments ,and worker attributes.  In our approach, we developed an automated system for attribute classification based on the algorithm. After obtaining the result with help of automated system, we carried out a comparative study of various forecasting technique (Linear Regression) as well as with the help of data mining tool known as WEKA. The data set is used, was collected from the PR department (through the different block head quarters, Orissa) .Rest of this paper focused on the prediction of untested attributes. We have implemented this research with a very sound practical application of Linear Regression technique. The experiments are analyzed with the help of data set to determine their effectiveness when compared with some of the standard stastiscal techniques [2].  Data mining, popularly known as Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)[15] it is the  nontrivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown and potentially useful information from data in databases [4][5]. Though, data mining and knowledge discovery in databases (or KDD) are  frequently treated as synonyms, data mining is actually part of the knowledge discovery  process [3] [5].  The rapid growth of information technology in various fields of human life has changes in different ways .Information are available in the different formats like   records, documents, images, sound recordings, videos, scientific data etc. The  data  collected  from  different  applications require   proper   mechanism   of   extracting   knowledge /information  from  large  repositories  for  better  decision  making. Knowledge  discovery  in  databases (KDD), often called  data  mining,  aims  at the  discovery  of  useful information from large collections of data. The main objective of data mining technique is to extract regularities from a huge amount of data is due to the perception of” we are data rich but information poor”. Now a day’s workforce scheduling has became and major issue which attract rapid attentions. The reason behind this is modeling the efficient of worker force can not the reduce the cost expenditure of an organization but also it imparts the higher productivity and faster growth(Hunt et al., 2004).The International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012   21  most important  step of workforce is prediction of the worker demands for the different positions of the organization. Without accurate estimation of the requirement it is very difficult to generate the standard staff shift patterns, it may happen that we will failed to assign the right tasks to right staff at right time. This may hampers the workforce concept. That’s why it is the most important factor in the 21st century which must have to prediction the worker intensive organizations like PR (Panchayat Raj Department, where 341 blocks and 5364 numbers of Gram Panchayat are available) Department, Orissa, Call centers, Retail Industries, NREGA (National Rural Employment Guarantee Act), IAY (Indira Awaas Yojana, इंदरा आवास योजना) etc. These are the schemes which provide the PR department of Orissa, not only the Orissa but also in India’s most of the states. This workforce scheduling technique which is more suitable in said schemes .In practice, to make accurate estimation of worker demand is rather difficult. Different enterprises have different situations, for some companies, the staffing trends may be relatively stable and it is easy to translate their development strategies into accurate worker demand (Schedule Source, 2009). However, for most companies, the trends change unpredictably, they failed to translate business strategies into the number of worker required to satisfy their objectives (Dan 1996). Furthermore, the continuous competition in the market pushes companies to improve their service quality while minimizing cost expenditures, this add much more pressures to optimize the workforce size (Schedule Source, 2009). As a consequence, worker demand forecasting has been labeled as the weakest process in conducting workforce requirements (Dan 1996).   Demand forecast is one of the most important inputs in the supply chain management .It is basically used manufacturing process ,demands are predicted to perform the basic planning activities such as capacity planning, resource planning etc In difficult and uncertain stages such as demand forecast ,the expert forecast should be integrated with help of the stastiscal methods forecasting[7]  The objective of this paper is to need of assisting the decision making process about companies  Workforce size. Therefore, the objectivities separate into two parts. Firstly do research for various worker forecasting approaches in literatures, compare and analysis them to list the strengths and limitations. Analyze examples which applied these approaches to know how they are worked in reality. Try to find the suitable situations of each of the approaches and classify them. After analyzing, try to develop a system to help organization decide their workforce size. The system will have a user interface to show all information of each approach. Customers can directly choose the suitable approaches by reading the descriptions of each approach. Moreover, the system will provide automatically selection and calculation function for users. Users will be required to select an option from a given menu provided on the first tab of the interface. After this selection, the system will generate a series of suggestions which showing at the SUGGESTION tab. The suggestions include a list of the suitable approaches, with each approach a link button.   