International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
DOI : 10.5121/ijcseit.2012.2503                                                                                                                    19 
 
 
Data Mining: A prediction Technique for the 
workers in the PR Department of Orissa 
(Block and Panchayat)   
 
Neelamadhab Padhy
1
 
 
and Rasmita Panigrahi
2
 
 
1 
Assistant. Professor, Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology, GIET, Gunupur 
     nmp.phdcmj2010@gmail.com, neela.mbamtech@gmail.com 
Research Scholar, Department of Computer Science CMJ University, Meghalaya 
(Shilong) 
2 
Lecturer, Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology, GIET, Gunupur 
    rasmi.mcamtech@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract: 
 
This paper presents the  method of mining the data and which contains the information about  the large 
information about the PR (Panchayat Raj Department) of Orissa .we have focused some of the   techniques 
,approaches and  different  methodology’s  of the demand forecasting .Every organizations are operated  in 
different places of the country. Each place of operation may generate a huge amount of data. In an 
organization, worker prediction is the difficult task of the manager. It is the complex process not only 
because its nature of feature prediction but also various approaches methodologies always makes user 
confused. This paper aims to deal with the problem selection process.In this paper we have used some of 
the approaches from literatures are been introduced and analyzed to find its suitable organization and 
situation, Based on this we have designed with automatic selection function to help users make a 
prejudgment The information about each approach will be showed to users with examples to help 
understanding. This system also provides calculation function to help users work out a predication result. 
Generally the new developed system has a more comprehensive functions compared with existing ones .It 
aims to improve the accuracy of demand forecasting by implementing the forecasting algorithm. While it is 
still a decision support system with no ability of make the final judgment. .The data warehouse is used in 
the significant business value by improving the effectiveness of managerial decision-making. In an 
uncertain and highly competitive business environment, the value of strategic information systems such as 
these are easily recognized however in today’s business environment, efficiency or speed is not the only 
key for competitiveness. This type of huge amount of data’s are available in the form of tera- to peta-bytes 
which has drastically changed in the areas of science and engineering. To analyze, manage and make a 
decision of such type of huge amount of data we need techniques called the data mining which will 
transforming in many fields. We have implemented the algorithms in JAVA technology. This paper provides 
the prediction algorithm (Linear Regression, result which will helpful in the further research. 
 
Keywords 
 
Data Mining, Classification Based on the Data Mining, Data Mining Forecasting Technique 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  20 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Data mining is the most important research domain in the 21
st
 century. The objective is to extract 
the regularities from a huge amount of data .For this purpose some efficient techniques have been 
proposed like the appriori algorithm.  
 
Forecasting is very important for prediction of the feature events .Science and computer 
technology together has made significant advances over the past several years and using those 
advanced technologies and few past patterns, it grows the ability to predict the future .Feature 
prediction is a process of choosing the best subset of the features available from the selected input 
data .The best subset contains the minimum number of dimensions that contribute more 
accuracy. 
 
Accurate demand forecasting remains difficult and challenging in 21
st
 century which is a 
competitive and dynamic business environment .A little bit improvement in the regard which 
may gives the significant result   to the worker as well manager of an organization. .It aims to 
improve the accuracy of demand forecasting by implementing the forecasting algorithm. It is a key business 
function for an organization and employeers (workers).the majority of an organization (PR Dept) still 
conduct demand forecasting using outdated, often homegrown systems that lack forecasting algorithms 
and analytical tools [1].Worker demand in an organization can depend upon various attributes such as 
size related factors and information about different departments ,and worker attributes. 
 
In our approach, we developed an automated system for attribute classification based on the algorithm. 
After obtaining the result with help of automated system, we carried out a comparative study of various 
forecasting technique (Linear Regression) as well as with the help of data mining tool known as 
WEKA. The data set is used, was collected from the PR department (through the different block head 
quarters, Orissa) .Rest of this paper focused on the prediction of untested attributes. We have 
implemented this research with a very sound practical application of Linear Regression technique. The 
experiments are analyzed with the help of data set to determine their effectiveness when compared with 
some of the standard stastiscal techniques [2]. 
 
Data mining, popularly known as Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)[15] it is the  
nontrivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown and potentially useful information from data 
in databases [4][5]. Though, data mining and knowledge discovery in databases (or KDD) are  
frequently treated as synonyms, data mining is actually part of the knowledge discovery  
process [3] [5]. 
 
The rapid growth of information technology in various fields of human life has changes in 
different ways .Information are available in the different formats like   records, documents, images, 
sound recordings, videos, scientific data etc. The  data  collected  from  different  applications 
require   proper   mechanism   of   extracting   knowledge /information  from  large  repositories  
for  better  decision  making. Knowledge  discovery  in  databases (KDD), often called  data  
mining,  aims  at the  discovery  of  useful information from large collections of data. The 
main objective of data mining technique is to extract regularities from a huge amount of data 
is due to the perception of” we are data rich but information poor”. Now a day’s workforce 
scheduling has became and major issue which attract rapid attentions. The reason behind this 
is modeling the efficient of worker force can not the reduce the cost expenditure of an 
organization but also it imparts the higher productivity and faster growth(Hunt et al., 2004).The 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  21 
 
most important  step of workforce is prediction of the worker demands for the different positions of the 
organization. Without accurate estimation of the requirement it is very difficult to generate the standard 
staff shift patterns, it may happen that we will failed to assign the right tasks to right staff at right time. 
This may hampers the workforce concept. That’s why it is the most important factor in the 21
st
 century 
which must have to prediction the worker intensive organizations like PR (Panchayat Raj Department, 
where 341 blocks and 5364 numbers of Gram Panchayat are available) Department, Orissa, Call 
centers, Retail Industries, NREGA (National Rural Employment Guarantee Act), IAY (Indira Awaas 
Yojana, इंदरा आवास योजना) etc. These are the schemes which provide the PR department of Orissa, 
not only the Orissa but also in India’s most of the states. This workforce scheduling technique which is 
more suitable in said schemes .In practice, to make accurate estimation of worker demand is rather 
difficult. Different enterprises have different situations, for some companies, the staffing trends may be 
relatively stable and it is easy to translate their development strategies into accurate worker demand 
(Schedule Source, 2009). However, for most companies, the trends change unpredictably, they failed to 
translate business strategies into the number of worker required to satisfy their objectives (Dan 1996). 
Furthermore, the continuous competition in the market pushes companies to improve their service 
quality while minimizing cost expenditures, this add much more pressures to optimize the workforce 
size (Schedule Source, 2009). As a consequence, worker demand forecasting has been labeled as the 
weakest process in conducting workforce requirements (Dan 1996).  
 
Demand forecast is one of the most important inputs in the supply chain management .It is basically 
used manufacturing process ,demands are predicted to perform the basic planning activities such as 
capacity planning, resource planning etc In difficult and uncertain stages such as demand forecast ,the 
expert forecast should be integrated with help of the stastiscal methods forecasting[7] 
 
The objective of this paper is to need of assisting the decision making process about companies 
 Workforce size. Therefore, the objectivities separate into two parts. Firstly do research for 
various worker forecasting approaches in literatures, compare and analysis them to list the 
strengths and limitations. Analyze examples which applied these approaches to know how they 
are worked in reality. Try to find the suitable situations of each of the approaches and classify 
them. After analyzing, try to develop a system to help organization decide their workforce size. 
The system will have a user interface to show all information of each approach. Customers can 
directly choose the suitable approaches by reading the descriptions of each approach. Moreover, 
the system will provide automatically selection and calculation function for users. Users will be 
required to select an option from a given menu provided on the first tab of the interface. After this 
selection, the system will generate a series of suggestions which showing at the SUGGESTION 
tab. The suggestions include a list of the suitable approaches, with each approach a link button.  
 
This paper consists of the six parts, which are introduction, literature review, problem 
identification and motivation, system design, system implementation and testing, and conclusion. 
Literature review part will express in detail about the forecasting approaches, their methodology, 
benefits and limitations. Problem identification part will summaries current conflicts about 
worker demand forecasting process, analysis the limitations of current existing systems and draw 
the motivation and requirements of this system. The system design part will describe the design 
elements in detail with system structure, interface design, data structure design, and algorithm 
design. System implementation and testing part will display the methods been used to realized the 
design ideas by analyzing some codes and also show the testing processes. Finally the conclusion 
part will summaries the achievements; evaluate the system and describe how it could be 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  22 
 
developed further. The last but not the least which will hugely use for the researchers i.e. Feature 
scope. 
 
2. Literature Review  
 
There are several approaches that have been used for workforce scheduling .In some cases, 
advances numerical analysis has used for workforce scheduling for workers in an organization 
like PR Department but in most of the situation clustering technique are used for different types 
of prediction. There are so many approaches are available but we have used some of the 
approach. 
 
There has been some few work on this topic since the last two decades. Many researchers have 
used the forecasting techniques like hotel room arrival forecasting, airline reservation forecasting. 
 
Topic et al. Data Mining 
forecasting technique 
Data mining 
Agriculture  
 
[9]Dzeroski,A.Kobler,V.Gjorgijoski,P.Paniov 
using decision Trees to predict Forest stand Height 
and Canopy cover from LANDSAT and LIDAR 
data ,20th Int. conference for environmental 
Protection-Managing Environmental Knowledge-
2006 
WEKA: It is an open 
source data mining tool. 
Clustering, Classification, 
Association Rule. 
 [10] “WEKA3: Data mining Software in Java” : 
Retrieved March 2..7from 
http://www.cs.waikayo.ac.nz/ml/weka 
 
WEKA tools  
Soil Data Analysis 
using classification 
Techniques and 
Soil Attribute 
Prediction 
[11] Jay Gholap,Anurag Ingole et al  “  Soil Data 
Analysis using classification Techniques and Soil 
Attribute Prediction” 
Classification, Regression, 
Soil testing in agriculture. 
Techniques are used  :  
 Naïve Bayes 
 J48(C4.5) 
 JRip 
  
Multi Relational 
Data mining 
Approaches by 
using demand 
forecasting  
[12]et.al.Dr.Pragnyaban Mishra,Neelamadhab 
Padhy, Rasmita Panigrahi “MRDM Approaches in 
the PR. Department of Orissa” published in CIIT 
Int.Nnational journal of Data mining and 
Knowledge Engineering ,vol-4 No:55 ,May 2012 
Classification ,clustering 
,.Apart from the two data 
mining models are 
proposed these are : 
 Pure 
Classification 
model 
 Hybrid clustering 
classification 
model 
Demand and 
Forecasting by 
using fuzzy System 
[7]. Armstrong et.al,Green,K.c.,Soo,W  “ polar 
Bear population forecast: A public-policy 
Forecasting Audit”,Interfaces,38(2008),3820-405 
 
Fuzzy clustering ,Neural 
networks and genetic 
algorithm 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  23 
 
Demand 
forecasting for 
railway using data 
mining  
[14].Giovanni Melo Carvalho Viglioni “ 
Methodology for Railway demand forecasting 
using Data Mining” 
CRISP-
DM,SEMMA,FAYYAD 
Developing the 
Age Dependent 
Face Recognition 
System 
[39]. Hlaing Htake Khaung Tin, Myint Sein” 
Developing the Age Dependent Face Recognition 
System” 
They have predicted the 
age by using Eigen face for 
age prediction techniques  
 
Table 2.1 Literature survey of Different technique 
 
This section will talk about several of human resource forecasting approaches found in the 
literatures. Currently. Generally, the selected approaches have a broader usability and the 
methodologies are understandable without specific background knowledge required. This section 
will mainly describe the seven selected approaches, the first four are quantitative methods which 
have algorithms to calculate out the worker demand; the last three are qualitative methods which 
focus on managerial techniques, and the manager plays a significant role (Bohalander & Snell 
2007). When we will apply this technique the organization will gain a lot but before that they 
should have the overall idea about the workers in the organization, its strengths and weaknesses 
(Noe et al., 2004). Other factors like what they want the organization to be, its size, further 
business goals should also be clear. This helps to choose the proper worker demand forecasting 
approaches and builds an optimal workforce size. 
 
3. Data Mining System Types [16] 
 
In data mining the classification is one of the most important tasks. We have so many 
classification approaches for are available for extracting knowledge from data such as statistical 
[23], Divide-and-conquer [24] and covering [25] approaches. Several approaches has been 
derived these are Naiave Bayes [26], C4.5 [27], PART [28], Prism [29] and IREP [16]. The 
different classification methods are used to categorize the data mining methods.  One can classify 
human beings based on their race or can categorize products in a supermarket based on the 
consumers shopping choices. In general, classification involves examining the features of new 
objects and trying to assign it to one of the predefined set of classes [31] 
 
  The data mining classification system is classified as follows; 
 
 What type of classification is to be mined according to the type of data source 
mined   
The data may classified and handled such as multimedia time-series, test etc  
 Classification  according to the data model  
The classification is based on the data model ,it may be one of the HDM(Hierarchical ),NDM 
(Network Data Model ),RDM (Relational Data model),ORDM(object Relational Data 
Model),transactional database, data ware house  
 Based on what kind of knowledge find  
This classification based on the data mining functionalities, which may be one of the followings: 
 Characterization 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  24 
 
 Discrimination, 
 Association, 
 Clustering 
 
Among different classification attributes we studied but the most attribute is “Based on what 
kind of knowledge find” because this classification presents a clear picture on the 
different data mining requirements and techniques. 
 
4 DIFFERENT APPROACHES  
 
4.1 Direct Managerial Input  
 
In this approach we have used that let the headcount or the total cost will be fixed number. Now 
days it is called as percentage reduction. This approach is helpful to build an optimum staffing 
template for specific organization (Schedule Source, 2009). As Dan (1996)  .This will helpful 
when the company has overstaffed  .The primary goals are the expected cash flow or adjustments 
to the company’s return ratios like rate of return, return on capital employed and discounted 
cash flow return on investment. By using this approach, the future prediction of the can be done 
and calculated by total figure / average figure and the divisor and dividend could change to meet 
different analysis criteria like total future output; total investment returns and so on.  
 
The advantage of this approach is that  
• It is easy to calculate and can implement with simple algorithms. 
• This approach can also be used for new established company to make a roughly 
prediction. 
 
The disadvantage of this approach is that  
• It does not analysis the business objectives and has no linkage to the actual 
workload requirement. 
 
4.2 Historical Ratio 
 
 According this method by Marching ton and Wilkinson (2005), the overall demand generally 
related with other business factors .The statistics are as follows [31] 
• The  number of items manufactured,  
• The number of clients working in the organization , 
• the total budget  of the year 
 
The advantage of this approach is that 
It is easily understood and can develop with simple methodologies like Excel or Lotus 
spreadsheets 
 
The disadvantage of this approach is that 
When we will take any negative value, the productivity remains unchanged because it is 
very difficult to adjustment for a rapid change of working condition. 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  25 
 
4.3 Scenario Analysis  
 
This approach is more suitable for the human resource to do the strategic human resource 
forecasting. 
 
The HR person will take the series of scenarios and by using this scenario they will predict for 
couple of years. It is one kind of brainstorming sessions with the line manager and the HR 
manager who have forward looking ability. Let them to develop their scope of the workforce five 
years or more in the future and then move backwards to find out the key changing 
points.[32],[33],[34],[35].In general when people discuss the requirements document they are 
imagination a system does not yet exist. It is generally “What If” analysis ,these cases and 
sequence of events that results are known as the Scenarios. 
 
The series of actions to be taken as:- 
  
1. Preparation of background  
2. Selection of critical indicators  
3. Establishing past behavior of indicators  
4. Verification of potential future events  
5. Forecasting the indicators  
6. Writing of scenarios  
 
4.4 Regression model Methods 
 
A regression is a statistical analysis [3] assessing the association between two variables. It is 
used to find the relationship between two variables. et.al [16] Neelamadhab Padhy ,and 
Rasmita defined that is a one kind of predictive model which provides the prediction about the 
unknown data values by using the known data. There are so many techniques are available like 
Classification, Regression, Time series analysis, Prediction etc. If a set of random data (x1, y1) T, 
(x2, y2) T, (x n, y n) T for two numerical variables X and Y, where X is a cause of Y. In this 
linear regression analysis, the distribution of the random data appears as a straight line in X, Y 
space when X and Y are perfectly related linearly. This captures a relationship between two 
variables. This line function can be given as [36], [37]. 
 
ŷ = ax + b 
 
Here, the linear regression model is used to extract the texture features from the correlation in the 
frequency channel pairs. The energy values of two frequency channels of one of the channel pair 
in the top ten list are taken from the channel energy matrix M and consider these energy values as 
the random data (x1, y1)T,(x2,y2)T,………..(x n, y n)T for two variables X and Y represent a 
straight line in X,Y space. 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  26 
 
 
The technique regression is basically used in the case of prediction. In Regression analysis the 
prediction variables are the continuous variables .So many techniques are available Neural Net 
work, SVM(Support Vector Machine, Linear Regression etc .In  this paper we have used the 
linear regression analysis. 
 
Regression Formula 
 
Regression Equation (y) = a + bx slope ‘b’, Intercept ‘a’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And correlation coefficient is ‘r’ 
Where: 
x and y are the variables. 
b = the slope of the regression line 
a = the intercept 
point of the 
regression line and   
the y axis. N = 
Number of values or 
elements 
X = First Score 
Y = Second Score 
ΣXY = Sum of the product of first and Second Scores 
ΣX = Sum of First Scores 
ΣY = Sum of Second Scores 
ΣX2   = Sum of square First Scores 
 
Using regression algorithms like Linear Regression, Least Square, Simple Regression different 
attributes were predicted .Acceding to the results the values of the attributes are found most 
accurately predicted and it depends on least number of attributes. 
 
In such a situation it may happen that all the attributes are numeric, linear regression is a natural 
and simple technique to consider for numeric prediction, but it suffers from disadvantage of 
linearity. If the data exhibits the non linear dependency then we may not get the best results 
.Specially in that cases we may used median regression technique but which incur the high 
computational cost which is not feasible solution [8] 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  27 
 
This approach relies on objective data and formal regression models .This is the simplest version 
among various regression modules is linear regression model. 
In this model we have used the time as the independent variable and headcount is the dependent 
variable Linear regression refers to a model in which the conditional mean of y given the value of 
x is an affine function of x (Lawrence & Geurts 2008). Most commonly, the relationship between 
the dependent variable y and all vectors of repressors x is approximately linear. Linear regression 
model can use the least squares approach which means the overall solution (the line) minimize 
the sum of the distance between each observed point to the approximate line  
 
In this methodology the basis steps are: 
 
• To collect  the related data   
• Analysis the data to work out the regression function  
 
 Major Steps 
 
1. Collect related data, the data could from previous years, or some related data which can be 
used in an x y coordinate to generate a liner function.  
 
E.g. The PR and HEALTH Department   is planning to establish new schemes for old age peoples 
to provide a medical facility where with one hundred beds are required. They want to know how 
many Medical Staffs should be recruited so that the hospital can run smoothly. They observed 
twelve similar sized hospitals nearby, and the result respectively is that: sickbeds number (t) [23, 
29, 29, 35, 42, 46, 50, 54, 64, 66, 76, and 78]; medical staff number employed by each hospital 
(y) [69, 95, 102, 118, 126, 125, 138, 178, 156, 184, 176, and 225].  
2. Use linear regression analysis to work out the function: 
 Y = b + a * X,  
b = (nΣty - ΣtΣy) / [nΣt2 - (Σt) 2]  
a = y - bt  
E.g. In this case, they need to forecast the number of medical staff needed for the new hospital by 
the known number of sickbeds. The regression function is where the variable parameter a and b 
could be generated by using regression analysis method. As a consequence, the regression 
function is:  
Y= 30.912 + 2.232 * X.  
3. Work out the amount of Y by given X. (Y is the predication)  
E.g. Here X = 100 (100 sickbeds), then Y = 30.912 + 2.232 * 100 = 254.063, that means about 
254 medical staffs needed.  
Due to the requirement of various data, it may not suitable for new established companies and 
companies entering new market unless they conducted comprehensive surveys to get enough data 
to establish the regression model. The main strength of this approach is that it can provide 
organizational insight and usually generate the most accurate requirements (Dan 1996). It works 
efficiently when there is a long stable history that can be used to reliably analyze the relationships 
among variables. However, before build the models, it requires long learning of the techniques 
and the model builders should get fully understand of the techniques and the organization such 
as its cost budgets, business goals and so on  
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  28 
 
5. Table Description 
 
These are the following table which is used in this paper. 
 
 Approach Table   
An approach table which consists information about the different approaches attributes inn this 
tables are ID, name, introduction, strength, limitation and suitability. 
 Approach Application Table  : 
 This table has the following attributes these are  ID, name, description of methodology and 
examples.  
 System Description  Table  
This table stores the description about this system. 
 
Table Structure of Approach Table   
 
 
       
Table 5.2 
 
6. Linear Regression Algorithm Implementation : (Forecasting 
Algorithm Implementation) 
 
This is the most important algorithm implementation part and it calculate the most complex 
calculation part .We have seen the other algorithm are easiest one because these are quantitative 
Figure…….gives code implementation of Linear Regression Forecasting Method that is included 
in the packages of „NEELAMADHAB.GIET.llx‟ and named as „LinearRegression‟ in class 
„LinearRegression‟. 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  29 
 
Code  for the Decision Matrix 
 
public static final int approachNumbers = 7;  
public static final int decisionMatrix[][]=  
{{0,0,0,0,0,0,0},  
{1,0,0,1,0,0,1},  
{1,1,0,1,0,0,1},  
{0,1,0,1,1,1,0},  
{0,1,1,1,0,0,0},  
{0,1,1,1,0,0,0},  
{0,1,0,0,0,0,1},  
{0,0,0,0,0,0,0}};  
public int suitableMethods = 0;  
public int whichMethod[] = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0}; 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.1 Code implementation of Linear Regression Forecasting 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  30 
 
It is worthy to note that, the linear regression algorithm has three input parameters: double 
typed X and Y series and an integer typed N. Its output parameter is a double array A with 
two elements A[0] and A[1] so that the linear regression equation can be expressed as Y = 
A[1] + A[0]*X. 
 
7.  Designing of an algorithm for the Class methods 
 
Here we are designing the workflow of the class inside the methods .It imparts the process of 
selecting the most suitable approaches for the specific users. 
 
For selecting the possible users, the system treated as different types of the users may be the 
public service (Dchool, Govt, Hospital), Organizations, Retailers, manufacturing company etc. 
After classification, a matchable (suitable) approaches list and the corresponding application 
requirements should be found for each category .By analyzing comprehensive materials, a series 
of matchable approaches could be listed for each category. At this stage, a decision table could be 
developed with the seven approaches horizontally ranked in columns and the six categories 
vertically ranked in rows.. In the system, a decision matrix (a two dimension array) is defined 
with the same idea of decision table. The six categories are set as options on HOME tab with each 
category corresponds a row of the decision matrix. In each row (option) of the matrix, suitable 
approaches are been marked. 
 
Pass 1 :  In this stage the user will select the option provided the menu. For this purpose the user 
will select the combo box in the menu. 
Pass 2:  If the user will choose one of these categories the system searches the corresponding row 
in the  decision matrix and jump to the Pass-3 stage  
Pass 3 : Represent all the Forcasting approaches one after another and link the button  
Pass 4 :  In this stage the user must provide the input data and then use the button “RUN The 
Algorithm” the system will provide the Forcasting results. 
Pass 5: In this stage, if the user will select the close option of the “JApplet” in any above Passes 
then the algorithm will stop working  
  
8. Implementation  
 
We have used the JAVA programming language under the ECLIPSE software .The entire 
process is carried out of the two packages, where the first Package contains the class Linear 
Regression and the other package contains the other classes along with the Applet. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  31 
 
 
 
 
Package Classification and Tree Structure  
 
9.  Screen Shots 
 
In this paper we have implemented the java programming language ,we have used the java 
JApplet which contains more number of components like Panel, Button ,Jcombobox etc The 
main class contains NEELAMADHAB.GIET applet contains huge lines of coding .When we 
start running the applet then some of the screen shots are displaying . 
 
C:\Neelamadhab>javac NEELAMADHAB.java 
 
C:\Neelamadhab>appletviewer NEELAMADHAB.html 
 
When we execute the command, then applet will execute and application start running, some of 
the screen shots are given below. 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  32 
 
10.  Comparison of Regression Algorithms 
 
There were very limited variations amongst the predicted values of the approach tables .As the 
Least Median of square algorithm which produce the better results .We have noticed that the 
accuracy of the linear regression was s relatively equivalent to that of the least median of squares 
algorithm 
 
Algorithm LRA Linear Regression 
Algorithm 
LMSA (Least Median 
Square Regression) 
Time taken to build the 
model 
0.16s 10.84s 
Relative Absolute Error 10.77% 10.01% 
Correlation coefficient  0.9810 0.9803 
 
Table-2 Describes the Comparison of the result 
 
We have compare the Data mining forecasting technique algorithm and  we found that the Relative 
absolute error is nearly same for both the prediction algorithmns.In the above table it is indicate 
that LMS regression provides the better result but to build the model is near about 70 times that of 
Linear regression. So the computational cost used by the LR is lower than that of LMS.  
 
TESTING OF AN Algorithm FOR CORRECTNESS  
 
In this section we cross verifies the calculation for the correctness of the different approaches by 
using the Microsoft Excel or Lotus .Here we are testing whether the results are same or not ? 
 
Cross verifying the  Regression Method  
 
In this methodology it  does the predication by work out a regression function. Here the user 
will input the series of collected data . 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  33 
 
 
 
Figure : Regression Method 
 
 
 
11. Conclusion   
 
In this paper we briefly reviewed the various data mining prediction techniques in literature 
.This research definitely helpful to other researcher to impart the several of data mining 
prediction issues. It is really very difficult to predict and it is a complex .Actually no 
approaches or tools can guarantee to generate the accurate prediction in the organization. In 
this paper, we have analyzed the different algorithm and prediction technique .Inspite the fact 
that the least median squares regression is known to produce better results than the classifier 
linear regression techniques from the given set of attributes. As comparison we found that 
Linear Regression technique which takes the lesser time as compared to Least Median Square 
Regression. 
 
12. Feature Scope 
 
If the researcher will  implement the data mining prediction and other classification technique like 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  34 
 
K-means,HC(Hybrid clustering ) and PC(Pure classification),Naïve Bayes ,J48(C 4.5),JRip  could 
have been found the better accuracy and minimize the error measure (Root  Relative Squared 
Error). 
 
Especially For Researchers 
 
During this implementation of Data Mining Prediction Technique (linear regression) we conclude 
that linear regression analysis can’t handle the large data sets. It doesn’t mean that this single 
model can handle the huge amount of data set . It is highly likely that we need multiple models to 
fit a large data set.  
 
To overcome the problems, the researchers can use the two models  
 
 First one -> Parametric Regression Model (Things to remember that the  researcher 
should understand  about the complicated large data set ) 
 Second one -> CART (Classification and Regression Tree) decision tree algorithm can be 
used to build both classification trees (to classify categorical response variables) and regression 
trees to forecast continuous response variables). Neural network too can create both classification 
and regression models. 
 
13.  REFERENCES 
 
[1] Joe Mckendric”Reversing the Supply Chain”,Teradata  Magazine-Applied Solutions ,Vol.3 
Nop.3,2003 
[2] L.Armstrong,D.Diepeven & R.Maddern(2004).”The application of data mining techniques to 
characterize agriculture soil profiles. 
[3] De Marco, Jim (2008). "Excel's data import tools". Pro Excel 2007 VBA. Apress. p. 43 ISBN 
1590599578. 
[4] Dunham, M. H., Sridhar S., “Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics”, Pearson Education, 
New  Delhi, ISBN: 81-7758-785-4, 1
st
 Edition, 2006 
[5] Chapman, P., Clinton, J., Kerber, R., Khabaza, T., Reinartz, T., Shearer, C. and Wirth, R... “CRISP-DM 
1.0 : Step-by-step data mining guide, NCR Systems Engineering Copenhagen (USA and 
Denmark), DaimlerChrysler AG (Germany), SPSS Inc. (USA) and OHRA Verzekeringenen Bank 
Group B.V (The Netherlands), 2000”. 
[6] Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., and Smyth P., “From Data Mining to Knowledge   
Discovery in Databases,” AI Magazine, American Association for Artificial Intelligence, 1996. 
[7] Armstrong et.al,Green,K.c.,Soo,W  “ polar Bear population forecast: A public-policy Forecasting 
Audit”,Interfaces,38(2008),3820-405 
[8]  I Written & F.Eibe,(2005),”Data mining practical Machine Learning Tools and technique” 2
nd
 edition 
,San Francisco :Morgan Kaufmann 
[9] Dzeroski,A.Kobler,V.Gjorgijoski,P.Paniov using decision Trees to predict Forest stand Height and 
Canopy cover from LANDSAT and LIDAR data ,20th Int. conference for environmental Protection-
Managing Environmental Knowledge-2006 
[10] “WEKA3: Data mining Software in Java” :Retrieved March 2..7 from  
http://www.cs.waikayo.ac.nz/ml/weka 
[11] Jay Gholap,Anurag Ingole et al  “  Soil Data Analysis using classification Techniques and Soil 
Attribute Prediction” 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  35 
 
[12] Dr. Pragnyaban Mishra,Neelamadhab Padhy, Rasmita Panigrahi “MRDM Approaches in the PR. 
Department of Orissa” published in CIIT  Int. National Journal of Data mining and Knowledge 
Engineering ,vol-4 No:55 ,May 2012 
[13] Official website of Govt.of  India, Ministry of Agriculture  http://agricoop.nic.in 
[14] Giovanni Melo Carvalho Viglioni “ Methodology for Railway demand forecasting using Data 
Mining” 
[15] VSRD-IJCSIT, Vol.2 (3), 2012 pages no -210-222.”Data warehousing and its OLAP,MRDM tech. for 
Decision Support in Business Organization of 21
st
 century” 
[16] Neelamadhab Padhy ,Rasmita Panigrahi  “Survey of data mining application and Feature scope “ , 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), 
Vol.2, No.3, June 2012 
[17] Armstrong, M. (2006) A Handbook of Human Resource Management Practice. 10st edition. [Internet] 
[18] Bajpai, J. N. (1990) Forecasting the basic inputs to transportation planning at the zonal level. 
Transportation Research Board. [Viewed 24th November, 2009]. 
[19] Chatterjee, S. & Hadi, A. (2006) Regression analysis by example. 4th edition. JOHN WILEY & 
SONS, INC. Canada. [Viewed 27th March]. 
[20] Dan, W. (1996) Workforce Demand Forecasting Techniques. [Internet] Human Resource Planning, 
19 (1): 54-55, 
[21] Koontz, H. & Weihrich, H. (2006) Essential of Management. 7th edition. Tata McGraw-Hill 
Publishing Company Limited. [Viewed 2nd January, 2010]. 
[22] The Department of Education & Science. (1990) Projecting the Supply and Demand of Teachers: A 
Technical Description. London, HMSO. [Viewed 21st October, 2009]. 
[23]   John, G. H. and Langley, P. (1995). Estimating Continuous Distributions in Bayesian Classifiers. 
Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. pp. 338- 345. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo. 
[24] Furnkranz, J. (1996). Separate-and-conquer rule learning. Technical Report TR-96-25, Austrian 
Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Vienna 
[25] Cendrowska, J. (1987). PRISM: An algorithm for inducing modular rules. International Journal of 
Man-Machine Studies. Vol.27, No.4, pp.349-370. 
[26]  John, G. H. and Langley, P. (1995). Estimating Continuous Distributions in Bayesian Classifiers. 
Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. pp. 338- 345. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo. 
[27] Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Francisco 
[28] Frank, E. and Witten, I. (1998). Generating accurate rule sets without global optimization. In Shavlik, 
J., ed., Machine Learning: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference, pp. 144-151, 
Madison, Wisconsin, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. 
[29]  Cendrowska, J. (1987). PRISM: An algorithm for inducing modular rules. International Journal of 
Man-Machine Studies. Vol.27, No.4, pp.349-370. 
[30]  Furnkranz, J. and Widmer, G. (1994). Incremental reduced error pruning. In Machine Learning: 
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Morgan Kaufmann. 
[31] Grobler, P., Wärnich, S., Carrell, M.R., Elbert, N.F., Hatfield, R.D. (2006) Human Resource 
Management in South Africa, 3rd edition. [Internet].  
[32] Krishnamurthi, K. (2006) Human Resource Management: Concept and Planning. 1st edition. Global 
Vision Publishing House. India. 
[33]  Jacobson, Object-Oriented Software Engineering: A Use-case Driven Approach, Addison-Wesley, 
1992. 
[34] J. Karat and J.L. Bennett, ‘‘Using Scenarios in Design Meetings—A Case Study Example,’’ in 
J.Karat (ed.) Taking Software Design Seriously: Practical Techniques for Human-Computer 
Interaction Design, Academic Press, 1991. 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.5, October 2012 
  36 
 
[35] K. Benner, M. Feather, W.L. Johnson and L. Zorman, ‘‘Utilizing Scenarios in the software 
Development Process,’’ Proc. IFIP WG8.1 Working Conf. Inf. Sys Development  Process, North-
Holland, 1993. 
[36] M. Lubars, C. Potts and C. Richter, ‘‘Developing Initial OOA Models,’’Proc. 15th Int. Conf.Software 
Eng., IEEE Comp. Soc. Press, 1993. 
[37] A.Subha, S.Lenty Stuwart “Linear Regression Model on Multiresolution Analysis for Texture 
Classification” Published in International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 2 – No.4, June 2010 
[38] Shweta Kharya “Using Data Mining Techniques For Diagnosis and Prognosis of Cancer Disease” 
,International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), 
Vol.2, No.2, April 2012  
[39] Hlaing Htake Khaung Tin, Myint Sein” Developing the Age Dependent Face Recognition 
System” 
 
Authors 
 
Mr.  Neelamadhab Padhy  is working  a s  a n  Assistant  Professor  in the 
Department of information and Technology  at Gandhi Institute of engineering and 
Technology (GIET), India. He has done a post- graduate from Berhampur University, 
Berhampur, India.  He   is a Life fellow member of Indian Society for Technical 
Education (ISTE). He is presently pursuing the doctoral degree in the field of Data 
Mining.  He has total teaching experience of 10 years .He has a total of 5 Research 
papers published in National / International Journals / Conferences into her credit. 
Presently he has also published 2 Books one is for   Programming in C and other is 
Object Oriented using C++. He has received his MTech (computer science) from Berhampur University 
Berhampur 2009, His main research interests are Data warehousing and Mining, Distributed Database 
System. Presently he is pursuing the PhD in computer science under the CMJ University, Shilong, and 
Meghalaya in the year of 2010. 
 
Mrs.Rasmita Panigrahi  is   currently working as  a lecturer in the department of 
information and technology  ,Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology .She 
received  her MCA  from BPUT,(Bijou Patina University of Technology University 
,Rourkela 2010 and she has completed   MTech(Computer Science) in Berhampur 
University ,Berhampur . Her main research interests are Data warehousing and Mining, 
Distributed Database System, Designing and Algorithm. And cryptography .She has 
published two International/National paper and attended the several conferences. 
