International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
287 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
Mining of Association Rule- A Review Paper 
 
 Pooja R. Harne 
Department of PG studies 
Prof. Ram Meghe College of Engineering & 
Management, Badnera- Amravati ,India 
Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
Department of PG studies 
Prof. Ram  Meghe College of Engineering & 
Management,Badnera-Amravati, India 
 
ABSTRACT 
Frequent pattern mining is one of the active 
research themes in data mining. It plays an 
important role in all data mining tasks such as 
clustering, classification, prediction, and 
association analysis. Identifying all frequent 
patterns is the most time consuming process 
due to a massive number of patterns generated. 
In this paper, we present thus study of different 
data structures used and the algorithms for 
finding the frequent items in the fastest way. 
We also present an approach for mining of 
association rule. 
Keywords 
Data mining; Frequentitemsets; Distributed 
computation, Association rules 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Data mining is a powerful new technology with 
great potential to help companies focus on the 
most important information in the data they 
have collected about the behavior of their 
customers and potential customers. Data 
mining, the extraction of hidden predictive 
information from large databases, is a powerful 
new technology with great potential to help 
companies focus on the most important 
information in their data warehouses. Data 
mining tools predict future trends and 
behaviors, allowing businesses to make 
proactive, knowledge-driven decisions. The 
automated, prospective analyses offered by data 
mining move beyond the analyses of past 
events provided by retrospective tools typical 
of decision support systems. 
Data mining is the process of analyzing 
data from different perspectives and 
summarizing it into useful information.  Data 
mining software is one of a number of 
analytical tools for analyzing data. Data mining 
sometimes called data or knowledge discovery.  
Data mining, also known as knowledge 
discovery in databases, has been recognized as 
a new area for database research.  The area can 
be defined as efficiently discovering interesting 
rules from large collections of data. 
Technically, data mining is the process of 
finding correlations or patterns among dozens 
of fields in large relational databases. 
Correlation typically is association rules. 
 The organization of this paper is as 
follows.  Next Section discusses the exact 
problem statement.  This is followed by the 
literature review of different data structures 
used and algorithms used.  This section is 
followed by mining the association rules from 
frequent itemsets.  Lastly, we propose an 
approach for mining of association rules where 
the data is large and distributed. 
 
I. Problem Statement 
Association Rule mining is one of the most 
important data mining tools used in many real 
life applications[4],[5].   In this paper, we will 
discuss the problem of computing association 
rules within a horizontally partitioned database. 
We assume homogeneous databases. To mine 
the association rules the first task is to generate 
the frequent itemsets.  Second task is to mine 
the association rules from the frequent itemsets. 
a. Generation of Frequent Itemsets 
 Frequent item sets from different databases 
come to a global database [1],[5]. Since there 
are so many databases through which frequent 
data goes to the global database so this 
increases the number of messages that need to 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
288 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
be passed so as to find frequent k item set.  The 
major problem with frequentset mining 
methods is the explosion of the number of 
results and so it is difficult to find the most 
interesting frequent item sets.So the concept of 
Finding frequent itemsets from the database 
which is at Different Distributions, and mine 
the association rules has been highlighted in 
this paper. 
b. Mining associations Rules 
Following the original definition by Agrawal 
the problem of association rule mining is 
defined as[5] : Let I = {i1, i2, ..., in} be a set of 
n binary attributes called items.   Let D = {t1, 
t2, ..,tn} be a set of transactions called the 
database. Each transaction in D has a unique 
transaction ID and contains a subset of the 
items in I.  A association rule is defined as an 
implication of the form X->Y where X, Y ⊆I 
and   X ∩ Y_ = ∅.  The sets of items (for short 
itemsets) X and Y are called antecedent (left-
hand-side or LHS) and consequent (right-hand-
side or RHS) of the rule respectively. An 
example of an association rule would be "If a 
customer buys a bread, he is 80% likely to also 
purchase milk." 
Given a minimum confidence threshold 
minconf and a minimum support threshold 
minsup, the problem is to  generate all 
association rules that have support and 
confidence greater than the user-specified 
minimum support and minimum confidence . In 
the first pass, the support of each individual 
item is counted, and the large ones are 
determined.  In each subsequent pass, the large 
itemsets determined in the previous pass is used 
to generate new itemsets called candidate 
itemsets. The support of each candidate itemset 
is counted, and the large ones are determined. 
This process continues until no new large 
itemsets are found. 
 
II. Review of Different Data Structures 
Used Trie Data Structure 
A trie is a tree data structure that allows strings 
with similar character prefixes to use the same 
prefix data and store only the tails as separate 
data.  One character of the string is stored at 
each level of the tree, with the first character of 
the string stored at the root.  The term trie 
comes from "retrieval” .Due to this etymology 
it is pronounced [tri] ("tree"), although some 
encourage the use of "try" in order to 
distinguish it from the more general 
tree.Thistrie data structure is used for storing 
frequent itemsets. 
 
1. Review of Different Algorithms Used
 AIS  Algorithm 
The AIS algorithm [17] was the first algorithm 
proposed by Agrawal ,Imielinski , and Swami 
for mining association rule. It focuses on 
improving the quality of databases together 
with necessary functionality to process decision 
support queries. In this algorithm only one item 
consequent association rules are generated, 
which means that the consequent of those rules 
only contain one item, for example,   rules like 
X ∩ Y ⇒Z can be generated but not the   rules 
like X ⇒Y ∩ Z.  
 AIS algorithm consists of two phases. 
The first phase constitutes the generation of the 
frequent itemsets. This is followed by the 
generation of the confident and 
frequentassociation rules in the second phase. 
The drawback of the AIS algorithm is that it 
makes multiple passes over the database. 
Furthermore ,it generate and counts too many 
candidate itemsets that turn out to be small, 
which requires more space and waste much 
efforts that turned out to be useless. 
2. SETM Algorithm 
In the SETM algorithm, candidate itemsets [16] 
are generated on-the-fly as the database is 
scanned, but counted at the end of the pass. 
Then new candidate itemsets are generated the 
same way as in AIS algorithm, but the 
transaction identifier TID of the generating 
transaction is saved with the candidate itemset 
in a sequential structure. It separates candidate 
generation process from counting. At the end of 
the pass, the support count of candidate 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
289 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
itemsets is determined by aggregating the 
sequential structure. The SETM algorithm [16] 
has the same disadvantage of the AIS 
algorithm. Another disadvantage is that for 
each candidate itemset, there are as many 
entries as its support value. 
3. Apriori algorithm 
The Apriori algorithm is one of the most 
popular algorithm in the mining of association 
rules in a centralized database[1] ,[5].Agarwal 
and Srikant in [1] proposed the Apriori 
Algorithm for finding the frequent itemsets 
.The Apriori Algorithm proposed to finds 
frequent items in a given data set using the 
antmonotone constraint.  The name of Apriori 
is based on the fact that the algorithm uses a 
prior knowledge of frequent itemset 
properties.Apriori employs an iterative 
approach known as a level wise search, where k 
item sets are used to explore (k+1) itemsets . 
This algorithm contains a number of passes 
over the database.During pass k, the algorithm 
finds the set of frequent itemsetsLk of length k 
that satisfy the minimum support requirement. 
Apriori is designed to operate on databases 
containing transactions. The purpose of the 
Apriori Algorithm is to find associations 
between different sets of data. It is sometimes 
referred to as "Market Basket Analysis". Each 
set of data has a number of items and is called a 
transaction. The output of Apriori is sets of 
rules that tell us how often items are contained 
in sets of data. 
 The main drawbacks of Apriori 
algorithm are 
a) It takes more time, space and memory for 
candidate generation process. 
b) To generate the candidate set it requires 
multiple scan over the database. 
4. AprioriTID Algorithm 
The AprioriTidalgorithm[1] also uses the 
apriori-gen function to determine the candidate 
itemsets before the pass begins. The interesting 
feature of this algorithm is that the database D 
is not used for counting support after the first 
pass. It is not necessary to use the same 
algorithm in all the passes over the data. 
Apriori still examines every transaction in the 
database. On the other hand, rather than 
scanning the database, AprioriTid scans Ck for 
obtaining support counts, and the size of Ck has 
become smaller than the size of the database. 
Based on these observations AprioriHybrid 
algorithm has been designed. This uses Apriori 
in the initial passes and switches to AprioriTid. 
5.AprioriHybrid  Algorithm 
Apriori performs better than AprioriTid in the 
initial passes but in the later passes AprioriTid 
has better performance than Apriori. Due to this 
reason we can use another algorithm called 
Apriori Hybrid algorithm [1].In which Apriori 
is used in the initial passes but we switch to 
AprioriTid in the later passes. The switch takes 
time, but it is still better in most cases. It is not 
necessary to use the same algorithm in all the 
passes over the data. Apriori still examines 
every transaction in the database. On the other 
hand, rather than scanning the database, 
AprioriTid scans Ck for obtaining support 
counts, and the size of Ck has become smaller 
than the size of the database . 
6.FP-GROWTH Algorithm 
To break the two drawbacks [14] of Apriori 
algorithm, FP-growth algorithm is used. FP-
growth requires constructing FP-tree. For that, 
it requires two passes. FPgrowth uses divide 
and conquer strategy. It requires two scans on 
the database. It first computes a list of frequent 
items sorted by frequency in descending order 
(F-List) and during its first database scan. In the 
second scan, the database is compressed into a 
FP-tree [15]. This algorithm performs mining 
on FP-tree recursively. There is a problem of 
finding frequent itemsets which is converted to 
searching and constructing trees recursively. 
The frequent itemsets are generated with only 
two passes over the database and without any 
candidate generation process. There are two sub 
processes of frequent patterns generation 
process which includes: construction of the FP-
tree, and generation of the frequent patterns 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
290 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
from the FP-tree. We provide the summary of related work and our findings in table 1. 
 
Table1.   The summary of related work and our findings 
SN Author Name Basic Concept Claims by Author Remark 
1 
RakeshAgrawal and  
RamakrishnanSrikant 
Year 1994 
 
Association rule 
Apriori Algorithm 
 is developed for  
finding the frequent 
itemsets 
For discovering all 
significant association 
rules between items in 
a large database of  
sales transactions. 
2 
RakeshAgrawaland 
RamakrishnanSrikant 
Year 2000 
Reconstruction  
Algorithm 
Reconstruct original 
shape of data. 
Reconstruction 
procedure to 
accurately estimate 
the distribution of 
original data values. 
3 
David W. Cheung, 
Vincent T. Ng,  
Ada W. Fu, 
&Yongjian Fu 
December 1996 
DMA -Distributed 
mining of 
Association rule- 
algorithm 
The performance of 
DMA depends on the 
distribution of the 
data across the 
partitions 
Techniques are used: 
1)Candidate Set 
generation ,  
  2) Local Pruning ,         
 3)Message     
Optimization  
4)Optimizing partition 
scanning 
4 
Murat Kantarcıoglu 
and Chris Clifton,  
September 2004 
Horizontal and 
vertical portioning 
Private Association 
Rule Mining 
And Secure 
Association Rule 
Mining 
This paper addresses 
secure mining of 
association rules over 
horizontally 
partitioned data. 
5 
Jong Soo Park , 
Ming Syan Chen and   
Philp  S. Yu. 
Year 1995 
 
algorithm DHP 
(standing for Direct 
Hashing and 
pruning ) 
DHP proposed has 2 
major features: 1 is 
efficient generation 
for large itemsets and 
the other is effective 
reduction on 
transaction database 
size 
The issue of mining 
association rules 
among items in a large 
database of sales 
transactions 
 
6 
RakeshAgrawal and  
RamakrishnanSrikant
Year 1995 
Association Rule 
Mining generalized 
association rules with 
a large database of 
customer 
transactions 
To replace 
each transaction with 
an “extended 
transaction” that 
contains all the items 
in the original 
transaction 
 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
291 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
III. An approach for mining the 
association rule in distributed database 
We present hereby an approach to find frequent 
itemsets from the database which is at Different 
Distributions, and mine the association rules . 
 Every site computes  the local support  
counts  of  all these  candidate sets  and  broad- 
casts them to  the other  sites. 
 All the  sites can  then find  the globally 
large itemsets for that  iteration. 
 Implementation of secure 
communication between different sites. 
 Mining the association rules from the 
globally large itemsets found in above step 
 
Conclusion  
Association rules are basic data mining tools 
for initial data exploration usually applied to 
large data sets, seeking to identify the most 
common groups of items occurring together.  
There are various association rule mining 
algorithms. In this paper we have studied and  
presented  several association rule mining 
algorithms : AIS, SETM, Apriori, Aprioritid ,  
Apriorihybrid, FP-growth.  Each algorithm has 
some advantages and disadvantages.  We have 
also studied and presented data structure used 
for frequent  pattern mining. We have also 
presented an approach for mining association 
rule in distributed database. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] RakeshAgrawal and RamakrishnanSrikant, 
“Fast Algorithms for    Mining Association 
Rules in Large Databases,” Proc 20th 
International Conference Very Large Data 
Bases (VLDB), pp. 487-499, Year 1994. 
[2] RakeshAgrawal and RamakrishnanSrikant, 
“Privacy-Preserving Data Mining,” Proc. 
ACM SIGMOD   Conference, pp. 439-450,  
Year 2000. 
[3] David.W Cheung, Vincent T. Ng, Ada W. 
Fu, and Yongjian  Fu, “Efficient Mining of 
Association Rules in Distributed 
Databases,” IEEE Transaction Knowledge 
and Data Eng., volume no. 8, no. 6, Year 
December 1996. 
[4]  Murat Kantarcioglu and Chris Clifton, 
“Privacy-Preserving Distributed Mining of 
Association Rules on Horizontally 
Partitioned Data,” IEEE Transaction 
Knowledge and Data Eng., volume no. 16, 
no. 9, pp. 1026-1037, Year September 
2004. 
[5] Jong Soo Park,  MingSyan Chen, and Philip 
S. Yu, “An Effective Hash Based 
Algorithm for Mining Association Rules,” 
Proc. ACM  SIGMOD Conference, pp. 175-
186, Year 1995. 
[6] RakeshAgrawal and RamakrishnanSrikant , 
“Mining Generalized Association Rules,” 
Proc. Int’l Conf. Very Large Data Bases 
(VLDB), pp. 407-419, 1995 
[7]  David W. Cheung, Jiawei Han, Vincent T. 
Ng, Ada W. Fu, and Yongjian Fu, “A Fast 
Distributed Algorithm for Mining 
Association Rules,” Proc. Fourth 
International Conference Parallel and 
Distributed Information Systems (PDIS), 
pp. 31-42, Year 1996 
[8]  Murat Kantarcioglu, Robert Nix, and 
JaideepVaidya, “An Efficient Approximate 
Protocol for Privacy-Preserving Association 
Rule Mining,” Proc. 13th Pacific-Asia 
Conf. Advances in Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining (PAKDD), pp. 515-524, 
Year 2009. 
[9] MihirBellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo 
Krawczyk, “Keying Hash Functions for 
Message Authentication,” Proc. 16th Ann. 
International Cryptology Conference 
Advances in Cryptology (Crypto), pp. 1-15, 
Year1996. 
[10] Assaf Schuster, Ran Wolff, and 
BobiGilburd, “Privacy-Preserving 
Association Rule Mining in Large-Scale 
Distributed Systems,” Proc. IEEE 
International  Symp. Cluster Computing 
and the Grid (CCGRID), pp. 411-418,   
Year 2004. 
International Journal of Engineering Technology, Management and Applied Sciences 
                                 
www.ijetmas.com  April 2015, Volume 3 Issue 4, ISSN 2349-4476 
 
 
292 Pooja R. Harne, Prof. S.D. Deshpande 
 
[11] Alexandre Evfimievski, Ramakrishnan 
Srikant, RakeshAgrawal, and Johannes 
Gehrke, “Privacy Preserving Mining of 
Association Rules,” Proc. Eighth ACM  
SIGKDD International Conference 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 
(KDD), pp. 217-228, Year 2002. 
[12] TamirTassa and Ehud  Gudes, “Secure 
Distributed Computation of Anonymized 
Views of Shared Databases,” Transaction. 
Database Systems, volume no. 37, article 
11, Year 2012. 
[13] Secure Mining of Association Rules in 
Horizontally Distributed Databases 
,TamirTassa , IEEE Transactions  On  
Knowledge And Data Engineering, VOL. 
26, NO. 4, April 2014. 
[14] Sotiris Kotsiantis, DimitrisKanellopoulos, 
AssociationRules Mining: A Recent 
Overview, GESTS International 
Transactions on ComputerScience and 
Engineering, Vol.32 (1), 2006, pp. 71-82 
[15] GagandeepKaur, ShrutiAggarwal 
,Performance Analysis of  Association Rule 
Mining Algorithms, International Journal of  
Advanced Research in Computer Science 
and Software Engineering,  Volume 3, Issue 
8, August 2013, ISSN: 2277 128. 
[16] M.  Houtsma  and A. Swami. Set-oriented  
mining of association rules. Research  
Report RJ 9567, IBM Almaden Research 
Center, San Jose, Cali- fornia, October 
1993. 
[17] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami. 
Mining association rules between sets of 
items in large databases. In Proc. of the 
ACM SIGMOD Conference    on    
Management of Data, Washington, D.C., 
May 1993. 
[18]   H. Grosskreutz, B. Lemmen, and S. 
Reuping, “ Secure Distributed Subgroup 
Discovery in Horizontally Partitioned 
Data,” Trans. Data Privacy, vol. 4, no. 3, 
pp. 147-165, 2011. 
 
 
 
