          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)      e-ISSN: 2395 -0056 
               Volume: 04 Issue: 01 | Jan -2017                      www.irjet.net                                                                p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2017, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 5.181       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |        Page 1705 
 
Heart Disease Prediction Using Data Mining 
Ajad Patel, Sonali Gandhi, Swetha Shetty,Prof. Bhanu Tekwani 
1Ajad Patel, Dept. Of Information Technology, Vidyalankar Institute Of Technology, Maharashtra, India 
2Sonali Gandhi, Dept. Of Information Technology, Vidyalankar Institute Of Technology, Maharashtra, India 
3Swetha Shetty, Dept. Of Information Technology, Vidyalankar Institute Of Technology, Maharashtra, India 
4 Prof.Bhanu Tekwani, Dept. Of Information Technology, Vidyalankar Institute Of Technology, Maharashtra, 
India 
---------------------------------------------------------------------***---------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract – Heart disease is a major life threatening 
disease that cause to death and it has a serious long term 
disability. There is wealth of data available within the 
health care system. However, there is lack of effective tools 
to discover hidden relationships and trends in data 
.Advanced data mining techniques can help remedial 
situations. This paper describes about a prototype using 
data mining techniques mainly Naïve Bayes and WAC 
(Weighted Associated Classifier).    
The dataset is composed of important  factors such as age 
,sex, diabetic, height, weight,  blood pressure, cholesterol, 
fasting blood sugar, hypertension, disease. The system 
indicates whether patient had a risk of heart disease or not. 
 
Key Words:  Data mining, Naïve Bayes, WAC, Prediction 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
 It is a world known fact that heart is the 
most essential organ in human body if that organ 
gets affected then it also affects the other vital parts 
of the body. Data mining aids in healthcare to 
support for effective treatment, healthcare 
management, customer relation management, fraud 
and abuse detection and decision making. A major 
challenge facing healthcare organizations (hospitals, 
medical centers) is the provision of quality services 
at affordable costs. Quality service implies 
diagnosing patients correctly and administering 
treatments that are effective. Poor clinical decisions 
can lead to disastrous consequences which are 
therefore unacceptable. Hospitals must also 
minimize the cost of clinical tests. They can achieve 
these results by employing appropriate computer-
based information and/or decision support systems. 
The healthcare industry collects huge 
amounts of healthcare data which, unfortunately, are 
not “mined” to discover hidden information for 
effective decision making. Clinical decisions are often 
made based on doctors’ intuition and experience 
rather than on the knowledge rich data hidden in the 
database. This practice leads to unwanted biases, 
errors and excessive medical costs which affects the 
quality of service provided to patients. For instance it 
might now be possible for the physicians to compare 
diagnostic information of various patients with 
identical conditions. Likewise, physicians can also 
confirm their findings with the conformity of other 
physicians dealing with an identical case from all 
over the world.  Medical diagnosis is considered as a 
significant yet intricate task that needs to be carried 
out precisely and efficiently. The automation of the 
same would be highly beneficial. 
 
1.1 Data Mining 
 
 Data Mining is about explaining the past and 
predicting the future by means of data analysis.  Data 
mining is a multi-disciplinary multi-disciplinary field 
which combines statistics, machine learning, artificial 
intelligence and database technology. The value of 
data mining applications is often estimated to be very 
high. Many businesses have stored large amounts of 
data over years of operation, and data mining is able 
to extract very valuable knowledge from this data. 
The businesses are then able to leverage the 
extracted knowledge into more clients more sales, 
and greater profits. This is also true in the 
engineering and medical fields. Data mining predicts 
the future of modeling. 
Predictive modelling is a process by which a model is 
created to predict an outcome. If the outcome is 
categorical it is called categorical and if the outcome 
is numerical it is called regression. Descriptive 
modeling or clustering is assignment of observations 
into clusters so the observation of same cluster are 
similar 
 
1.2 Heart disease in India 
 
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) have now become 
the leading cause of mortality in India. A quarter of 
all mortality is attributable to CVD. Ischemic heart 
disease and stroke are the predominant causes and 
are responsible for >80% of CVD deaths. The Global 
Burden of Disease study estimate of age-
standardized CVD death rate of  272 per 100 000 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)      e-ISSN: 2395 -0056 
               Volume: 04 Issue: 01 | Jan -2017                      www.irjet.net                                                                p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2017, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 5.181       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |        Page 1706 
 
population in India is higher than the global average 
of 235 per 100 000 population. Premature mortality 
in terms of years of life lost because of CVD in India 
increased by 59%, from 23.2 million (1990) to 37 
million (2010). 
 
2. Naïve Bayes 
 
The Naive Bayes model is an old method for 
classification and predictor selection that is enjoying 
a renaissance because of its simplicity and stability. 
The following notation is used:  
J0  Total number of predictors. 
 
X  Categorical predictor vector  
 
X’   ( X1, ..., XJ ), where J is the number of 
predictors considered.  
 
Mj  Number of categories for predictor 
Xj. 
 
Y  Categorical target variable. 
 
K  Number of categories of Y. 
 
N Total number of cases or patterns in 
the training data.  
 
Nk  The number of cases with Y= k in the 
training data. 
 
Nj mk The number of cases with Y= k and 
Xj=m in the training data.  
 
πk   The probability for Y= k.  
 
pj mk   The probability of Xj=m given Y= k.       
 
 
The Naive Bayes model is based on the conditional 
independence model of each predictor given the 
target class. The Bayesian principle is to assign a case 
to the class that has the largest posterior probability. 
By Bayes’ theorem, the posterior probability of Y 
given X is: 
 
 
 
 Let X1, ..., XJ be the J predictors considered in the 
model. The Naive Bayes model assumes that X1, ..., XJ 
are conditionally independent given the target; that 
is:  
 
 
 
 
These probabilities are estimated from training data 
by the following equations: 
 
2. WAC 
 
 
Figure -1: Associative Classifier for Data Mining 
 
 
Weighted Associative Classifier (WAC) is a new 
concept that uses Weighted Association Rule for 
classification. Weighted ARM uses Weighted Support 
and Confidence Framework to extract Association 
rule from data repository. The WAC has been 
proposed as a new Technique to get the significant 
rule instead of flooded with insignificant relation.  
The major steps are as follows: 
 1:  Initially, the heart disease data warehouse is pre -
processed in order to make it suitable for the mining 
process. 
2:  Each attribute is assigned a weight ranging from 0 
to 1 to reflect their importance in prediction model. 
Attributes that have more impact will be assigned a 
high weight (nearly 0.9)and attributes having less 
impact are assigned low weight(nearly 0.1) . 
3: Once the preprocessing gets over, Weighted 
Association Rule Mining (WARM) algorithm is applied 
to generate interesting pattern. This algorithm uses 
the concept of Weighted Support and Confidence 
framework instead of tradition support and 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)      e-ISSN: 2395 -0056 
               Volume: 04 Issue: 01 | Jan -2017                      www.irjet.net                                                                p-ISSN: 2395-0072 
 
© 2017, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 5.181       |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |        Page 1707 
 
confidence. Rules generated in this step are known as 
CAR (Classification Association Rule) and is 
represented as X  Class label where X is set of 
symptoms for the disease. Example of such rules are 
(Hypertension, “yes”) Heart_Disease=”yes” and 
{(Age,” >62”), (Smoking_habits, “yes”), (Hypertension, 
“yes”)}Heart_Disease=”yes” . 
4:  These rules will be stored in Rule Base.  
5: Whenever a new patient’s record is provide, the 
CAR rule from the rule base is used to predict the 
class label. 
 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this paper, we have presented an 
intelligent and effective heart disease prediction 
methods using data mining. We studied an  efficient 
approach for the extraction of significant patterns 
from the heart disease data warehouses for the 
efficient prediction of heart disease. Medical 
diagnosis is considered as a significant yet intricate 
task that needs to be carried out precisely and 
efficiently. The automation of the same would be 
highly beneficial. Data mining have the potential to 
generate a knowledge-rich environment which can 
help to significantly improve the quality of clinical 
decisions. 
The proposed work can be further enhanced 
and expanded for the automation of Heart disease 
prediction. Real data from Health care organizations 
and agencies needs to be collected and all the 
available techniques will be compared for the 
optimum accuracy. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. S. Dangare, S S. Apte Improved Study of Heart 
Disease Prediction System using Data Mining 
Classification Techniques , International Journal of 
Computer Applications (0975 – 888) Volume 47– 
No.10, June 2012. 
[2] J . Soni, U. Ansari, D. Sharma, S. Soni. Predictive 
data mining for medical diagnosis: An overview of 
heart disease prediction. International Journal of 
Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)Volume 17– 
No.8, March 2011 
[3] K. Srinivas, B. Kavihta Rani, Dr A. Govrdhan. 
Application of data mining techniques in healthcare 
and prediction of heart attacks 
[4] N .Aditya  Sundar, P. Pushpa Latha, M. Rama 
Chandra, Performance analysis of classification data 
mining techniques over heart disease database, 
IJESAT  volume-2, Issue-3, 470 – 478 
 [5] Nilakshi P. Waghulde, Nilima P.Patil, Genetic 
Neural Approach for heart disease prediction, 
International Journal of Advanced Computer 
Research, Volume-4 Number-3 Issue-16 September-
2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
