The Research of Data Mining Algorithm Based on Association Rules 
Lei Chen 
Basic Courses Teaching Department, The Chinese People's Armed Police Force Academy 
 Langfang 065000, China 
E-mail:chen_nuli@126.com 
 
 
Abstract-Based on in-depth study of the existing data mining 
and association rule mining algorithms, a new mining 
algorithm of weighted association rules is proposed. By 
introducing a support factor of the weighted frequent item sets, 
a reasonable minimum support is set. The algorithm does not 
need to repeatedly scan the database in the discovery of 
frequent item sets, so it greatly reduces the time of input and 
output, and improves the efficiency of data mining. 
 
Keywords-Data mining, Association rules, Apriori algorithm, 
Frequent item set 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Data mining coming from the rapid growth of 
information, is the process to extract, identify and find the 
potentially useful and ultimately understandable knowledge 
from the data. Data mining technology is to identify patterns 
of data in the data already existed, to help users understand 
the existing information and predict for the future conditions 
on the basis of existing information. 
Association rule mining is an important research branch 
of data mining, mainly used to discover the relevant links 
between items in the data set. Apriori algorithm and 
FP-Tree algorithm are classical algorithms in association 
rule mining, both mining based on that the amount of data in 
the transaction database will not change and each data item 
has equal importance[1]. However, in actual application, 
data in the database is constantly changing, and people’s 
concern for different data items is not the same. If we still 
use the traditional mining algorithms for association rule 
mining, the mining efficiency will be very low, and the 
mining results are not accurate enough. Therefore it is 
necessary to improve the existing data mining algorithms to 
meet the needs of association rule mining. 
II.  CHARACTERISTICS OF ASSOCIATION RULE MINING 
A.  Mathematical model of assocIation rule mining 
The purpose of association rule mining is to find out the 
hidden relationship between different data item sets in the 
database. In general, given a transaction database, the 
problem of association rule mining is the process to find the 
association rules through a user-specified minimum support 
and minimum confidence. Let },,,{ 21 miiiI =  be the 
set of all data items. D  is the set of all transactions in the 
transaction database, in which each transaction T  is a 
collection of items, and each transaction T  has a unique 
TID  identifier. For the item set IX ⊆ , which is called 
that T contains X only if TX ⊆ . If kX = , then the 
collection is called k  order set. If the items arranged 
according to the dictionary order, k order item set X can 
be expressed as ][]2[]1[ kXXX  . For the item 
set YXC = , if Y is m order item set, then Y  is 
the m order expansion of X .If YX , are project sets, 
and Φ=YX  , then a containing formula YX  is 
known as association rules, and YX ,  is separately called 
the premise and conclusion of the association rule YX  . 
Support is a measure of statistical significance of 
association rules in the entire transaction database, which 
demonstrates the degree of representation of the rule in all 
transactions. The greater the support, the more important the 
rule. If )(XSupport is not less than the user-specified 
minimum support MinSup , then X is called frequent 
item set, referred to as the frequent or large item set, 
otherwise known as non-frequent item set, referred to as 
non-frequent or small item set. The confidence is a measure 
of association rules’s accuracy . If 
MinSupXSupport ≥ )Y( and
MinConfYXconf ≥ )( , then the association rule is 
effective or strong association rule, otherwise, said the 
association rule to be invalid or weak association rule. 
The proportion of the rule YX   in the transaction 
database describes the appearance probability of the item set 
Y in all transactions in the absence of any condition effect. 
Degree of interest is the ratio between the confidence and 
expectations[2], which describes the impact of the 
emergence of item set X on the emergence of item set Y . 
Under normal circumstances, the degree of interest of a 
useful association rule is greater than 1. If the interest is no 
more than 1, this association rule does not make much 
sense. 
B.  Process of association rule mining 
Association rule mining is to find the association rules 
met the user-specified minimum support and minimum 
confidence requirement from the transaction database D . 
The entire mining process can be decomposed into the 
following two steps: first, find all frequent item sets, that is, 
find all the item sets had support greater than the given 
support threshold; second, based on the obtained frequent 
item sets, generate a corresponding strong association rule, 
that is, generate the association rules had support and 
confidence respectively greater than or equal to the given 
support threshold and confidence threshold[3]. In addition, 
interest can be used to help extract valuable association 
rules, remove the redundant or worthless association rules. 
The 2nd International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (2012)
Published by Atlantis Press, Paris, France. 
© the authors
 
 
0548
The basic model of association rule mining is shown in 
figure 1. 
Figure 1. The basic model of association rule mining 
 
In the above two steps, the second step is relatively 
easy, because it only needs to list all possible association 
rules based on the frequent item sets have been found, and 
then use the support threshold and confidence threshold to 
measure them, and the association rules both met the 
support threshold and confidence threshold requirements are 
considered to be interesting association rules. 
C.  Weighted association rule mining algorithms 
Association rules reflecting the interesting connections 
between data items in transaction database, is an important 
subject in knowledge discovery in databases. The attributes 
in the database are equal and consistent. That is, among the 
items in the database there is no importance and 
subordination distinction, and their importance is to be 
measured by calculating the frequency of their occurrence. 
Allocation of the items in the database is uniform, that is, 
the same or similar frequency. However, in the transaction 
database with actual transactions the items are often 
unevenly distributed, and some even the frequency may 
vary greatly, for example, some product project is new 
listed on or improved goods, some goods may be going 
promotions[4]. These all will lead to uneven distribution of 
the data items in the database. However, when this happens, 
it will result in problem when setting the minimum support 
high or low. If set too high, the association rules found may 
not involve the items with lower frequency; too low, there 
will be too many meaningless or even false association rules, 
but also may lead to combinatorial explosion, thereby 
reducing the efficiency of the algorithm. In order to reflect 
the different importance of various items, we have 
introduced the concept of the weighted item, to assign 
different weights for different items, to reflect the different 
importance of the items in the database, consequently to 
extend the issue model, the so-called weighted association 
rules. 
Make D  as the transaction database, a collection 
},,,{ 21 miiiI = of items is all the item sets in it, in 
which each transaction actually occurred is a subset of I , 
and given a transaction ID 
TID , },,,{ 21 mwwwW = for the weight set 
corresponding to I , },,,{ 21 pxxxX = and 
},,,{ 21 qyyyY =  for subsets of I , IYX ⊂, , 
and Φ=YX  , )(XSpport known as the support 
of X  in D , )(XConfidence as the confidence, as well 
as WMinSup for the minimum weighted support, then the 
issue of weighted association rules to be discussed is 
formalized as YX  . With the introduction of the 
concept of weights, the weighted frequent item set does not 
have the anti-monotony of the frequent item sets in general 
association rule mining, in other words, in the mining of 
weighted frequent item sets, because of different weights, 
the subset of them may no longer be weighted frequent item 
sets, so can not be the same as an ordinary association rule 
mining, but must seek new solutions for the mining of 
weighted association rules[5]. 
 
Figure 2.  Implementation process of weighted data mining algorithm 
 
Weighted association rule mining algorithm has a 
framework similar to Apriori algorithm, both through 
frequent item sets to generate candidate items, but in some 
specific details is clearly different. The subset of weighted 
association rule frequent item set may not be frequent, so 
we can not simply generate candidate k-item set only by the 
The 2nd International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (2012)
Published by Atlantis Press, Paris, France. 
© the authors
 
 
0549
first (k-1) frequent item set like the Apriori algorithm. For 
the production of 1-item set, to extract such k-item set from 
the database, and use J-support expectations, according to 
all candidate k-item sets to obtain by calculation. J is 
between the maximum possible length of the k and frequent 
item set, if the support of a certain k-item set is lower than 
all the J-support expectations, we can conclude that in the 
subsequent traversal it is impossible the subset of any 
frequent item set, thus it can be removed. All the item sets 
which may be frequent item subset constitute the candidate 
set kC . The mining of weighted association rules makes 
MINWAL (0) as the research object. Set transaction 
database as D , weight set as W , weighted minimum 
support as WMinSup  and weighted minimum confidence 
as WMinConf , then MINWAL (0) algorithm is shown as 
in figure 2. 
 
III.  IMPROVEMENT OF WEIGHTED ASSOCIATION RULE 
MINING ALGORITHM 
The weighted support of the above weighted 
association rule algorithms may be greater than 1, which is 
in contradiction with that the actual support should be less 
than 1. Algorithms need to frequently scan the database and 
generate a large number of candidate sets, and this tends to 
greatly affect the performance of the algorithm. For these 
reasons it needs to improve the existing data mining 
algorithms of weighted association rules[6]. The improving 
idea is as follows: use the classical algorithm of association 
rules to obtain the frequent item sets without weights, after 
weight treatment, the sum of weights is less than or equal to 
1, so these frequent sets are calculated weighted superset; 
calculate the weighted support of all the attribute sets in this 
superset, and remove the attribute sets with weighted 
support less than the minimum weighted support, resulting 
in all the weighted large attribute sets; use them to generate 
the required weighted association rules. As the definition of 
the weighted confidence is the same to the definition of 
common association rule confidence, so the Boolean 
association rules can be used directly to generate algorithm. 
In the process of weighted association rule mining, 
most of the weighted association rule mining algorithms are 
based on Apriori algorithm, but Apriori algorithm needs to 
frequently scan the database, resulting in a large number of 
candidate items, which seriously affected the efficiency of 
the algorithm. In order to improve the efficiency of the 
algorithm, in this paper the FP-Growth algorithm is as the 
basis for mining of weighted item sets. However, it must 
ensure that the frequent set generated by using the 
FP-Growth algorithm is a superset of the weighted frequent 
sets. In other words, it needs to set a reasonable minimum 
support for FP-Growth algorithm. If the minimum support 
sets too low, the efficiency of the algorithm will be certainly 
affected; if the minimum support sets too high, it can not 
guarantee that the frequent set generated by an ordinary 
association rule algorithm is a superset of the weighted 
frequent sets[7]. To this end, the introduction of a support 
factor of the weighted frequent item sets, represented by δ, δ 
is the reciprocal of the sum of all trading weights. Just 
making WMinSupδ as the minimum support of ordinary 
association rule mining, then the obtained frequent item set 
L is certainly the superset of the weighted frequent item set. 
The implementation process of improved data mining 
algorithm of weighted association rules is shown as in 
figure 3. 
The traditional association rule mining algorithm makes 
each record, each item with equal importance. However, in 
reality it is often not. To solve this problem, we have 
introduced weights. The improved algorithm needs not to 
repeat database scans when discovering the frequent item 
sets, the mining efficiency is greatly improved, such 
increase will be more apparent with the transaction data 
increase. 
IV.  CONCLUSION 
Discovery of association rules is the most successful 
and important task in data mining, and its goal is to discover 
all the frequent patterns in the data set. Association rules 
can be used to find the link between different products 
(items) in the transaction database, through which the 
buying behavior patterns of customers can be found out. 
Because different items have different importance, this 
paper introduces the concept of weighted association rule 
mining, and a new mining algorithm for weighted 
association rules is presented too. The algorithm does not 
need to repeatedly scan the database when discovering 
frequent item sets, therefore can greatly improve the 
efficiency of data mining. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sankar K. Pal, Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay, Shubhra Sankar Ray. 
Evolutionary Computation In Association Rules: A Review. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-PartC: Applications 
And Reviews, 2006, 36(5): 601-615. 
[2] Pan Hua, Xiang Tongde. Data Warehouse and Data Mining principles, 
tools and applications,China Electric Power Press, 2007, 12(96): 
101-106. 
[3] Costa Grahne and Jianfei Zhu. Efficiently Using Prefix-trees in 
Mining Frequent Item set. In Proceeding of the IEEE ICDM 
Workshop on Frequent Item set Mining Implementations, Nov. 2003. 
[4] Jacques Cohen. Bioinformatics — an Introduction for Computer 
Scientists, Data mining Computer Surveys, 2004, 36(2): 122-158. 
[5] Agrawal R, Aggarwal C, Prasad V. A tree pmjection algorithm for 
generation of frequent item sets [J]. Journal of Parallel and 
Distributed Computing, 2001, 61(3): 350-371. 
[6] Chen Lei-da etc. Data mining methods, applications, tools, 
Information Systems Management [M].2000, 17(1): 6570. 
[7] Kay C. Wiese, Edward Glen. An association rules based genetic 
algorithm for RNA secondary structure prediction. Soft Computing 
Systems: Design, Management and Application, 2002, 4(1): 173-182. 
The 2nd International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (2012)
Published by Atlantis Press, Paris, France. 
© the authors
 
 
0550
 
Figure 3. The implementation process of improved algorithm 
 
The 2nd International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (2012)
Published by Atlantis Press, Paris, France. 
© the authors
 
 
0551
