Abstract-Based on in-depth study of the existing data mining and association rule mining algorithms, a new mining algorithm of weighted association rules is proposed. By introducing a support factor of the weighted frequent item sets, a reasonable minimum support is set. The algorithm does not need to repeatedly scan the database in the discovery of frequent item sets, so it greatly reduces the time of input and output, and improves the efficiency of data mining.  Keywords-Data mining, Association rules, Apriori algorithm, Frequent item set I.  INTRODUCTION Data mining coming from the rapid growth of information, is the process to extract, identify and find the potentially useful and ultimately understandable knowledge from the data. Data mining technology is to identify patterns of data in the data already existed, to help users understand the existing information and predict for the future conditions on the basis of existing information. Association rule mining is an important research branch of data mining, mainly used to discover the relevant links between items in the data set. Apriori algorithm and FP-Tree algorithm are classical algorithms in association rule mining, both mining based on that the amount of data in the transaction database will not change and each data item has equal importance[1]. However, in actual application, data in the database is constantly changing, and people’s concern for different data items is not the same. If we still use the traditional mining algorithms for association rule mining, the mining efficiency will be very low, and the mining results are not accurate enough. Therefore it is necessary to improve the existing data mining algorithms to meet the needs of association rule mining. II.  CHARACTERISTICS OF ASSOCIATION RULE MINING A.  Mathematical model of assocIation rule mining The purpose of association rule mining is to find out the hidden relationship between different data item sets in the database. In general, given a transaction database, the problem of association rule mining is the process to find the association rules through a user-specified minimum support and minimum confidence. Let },,,{ 21 miiiI =  be the set of all data items. D  is the set of all transactions in the transaction database, in which each transaction T  is a collection of items, and each transaction T  has a unique TID  identifier. For the item set IX ⊆ , which is called that T contains X only if TX ⊆ . If kX = , then the collection is called k  order set. If the items arranged according to the dictionary order, k order item set X can be expressed as ][]2[]1[ kXXX  . For the item set YXC = , if Y is m order item set, then Y  is the m order expansion of X .If YX , are project sets, and Φ=YX  , then a containing formula YX  is known as association rules, and YX ,  is separately called the premise and conclusion of the association rule YX  . Support is a measure of statistical significance of association rules in the entire transaction database, which demonstrates the degree of representation of the rule in all transactions. The greater the support, the more important the rule. If )(XSupport is not less than the user-specified minimum support MinSup , then X is called frequent item set, referred to as the frequent or large item set, otherwise known as non-frequent item set, referred to as non-frequent or small item set. The confidence is a measure of association rules’s accuracy . If MinSupXSupport ≥ )Y( andMinConfYXconf ≥ )( , then the association rule is effective or strong association rule, otherwise, said the association rule to be invalid or weak association rule. The proportion of the rule YX   in the transaction database describes the appearance probability of the item set Y in all transactions in the absence of any condition effect. Degree of interest is the ratio between the confidence and expectations[2], which describes the impact of the emergence of item set X on the emergence of item set Y . Under normal circumstances, the degree of interest of a useful association rule is greater than 1. If the interest is no more than 1, this association rule does not make much sense. B.  Process of association rule mining Association rule mining is to find the association rules met the user-specified minimum support and minimum confidence requirement from the transaction database D . The entire mining process can be decomposed into the following two steps: first, find all frequent item sets, that is, find all the item sets had support greater than the given support threshold; second, based on the obtained frequent item sets, generate a corresponding strong association rule, that is, generate the association rules had support and confidence respectively greater than or equal to the given support threshold and confidence threshold[3]. In addition, interest can be used to help extract valuable association rules, remove the redundant or worthless association rules. The 2nd International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (2012)Published by Atlantis Press, Paris, France. © the authors  0548The basic model of association rule mining is shown in figure 1. Figure 1. The basic model of association rule mining  In the above two steps, the second step is relatively easy, because it only needs to list all possible association rules based on the frequent item sets have been found, and then use the support threshold and confidence threshold to measure them, and the association rules both met the support threshold and confidence threshold requirements are considered to be interesting association rules. C.  Weighted association rule mining algorithms Association rules reflecting the interesting connections between data items in transaction database, is an important subject in knowledge discovery in databases. The attributes in the database are equal and consistent. That is, among the items in the database there is no importance and subordination distinction, and their importance is to be measured by calculating the frequency of their occurrence. Allocation of the items in the database is uniform, that is, the same or similar frequency. However, in the transaction database with actual transactions the items are often unevenly distributed, and some even the frequency may vary greatly, for example, some product project is new listed on or improved goods, some goods may be going promotions[4]. These all will lead to uneven distribution of the data items in the database. However, when this happens, it will result in problem when setting the minimum support high or low. If set too high, the association rules found may not involve the items with lower frequency; too low, there will be too many meaningless or even false association rules, but also may lead to combinatorial explosion, thereby reducing the efficiency of the algorithm. In order to reflect the different importance of various items, we have introduced the concept of the weighted item, to assign different weights for different items, to reflect the different importance of the items in the database, consequently to extend the issue model, the so-called weighted association rules. Make D  as the transaction database, a collection },,,{ 21 miiiI = of items is all the item sets in it, in which each transaction actually occurred is a subset of I , and given a transaction ID TID , },,,{ 21 mwwwW = for the weight set corresponding to I , },,,{ 21 pxxxX = and },,,{ 21 qyyyY =  for subsets of I , IYX ⊂, , and Φ=YX  , )(XSpport known as the support of X  in D , )(XConfidence as the confidence, as well as WMinSup for the minimum weighted support, then the issue of weighted association rules to be discussed is 