                                                 
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 2, Issue 6, June 2013 
 
2081 
www.ijarcet.org 
 
 
  
Abstract— Association rule mining is the most important 
technique in the field of data mining. Association rule mining 
finding frequent patterns, associations, correlations, or causal 
structures among sets of items or objects in transaction 
databases, relational databases, and other information 
repositories. In this paper we present a survey of recent 
research work carried by different researchers. Of course, a 
single article cannot be a complete review of all the research 
work, yet we hope that it will provide a guideline for the 
researcher in interesting research directions that have yet to be 
explored.  
 
Keywords— Association Rules, Confidence, frequent items,  
Item set, Minimum Support. 
.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Association rules are one of the major techniques of data 
mining. The volume of data is increasing dramatically as the 
data generated by day-to-day activities. Therefore, mining 
association rules from massive amount of data in the database 
is interested for many industries which help in much business 
can decision making processes, such as cross marketing, 
Basket data analysis, and promotion assortment. It helps to 
find the association relationship among the large number of 
database items and its most typical application is to find the 
new useful rules in the sales transaction database, which 
reflects the customer purchasing behaviour patterns, such as 
the impact on the other goods after buying a certain kind of 
goods. These rules can be used in many fields, such as 
customer shopping analysis, additional sales, goods shelves 
design, storage planning and classifying the users according 
to the buying patterns, etc. The techniques for discovering 
association rules from  
The data have traditionally focused on identifying 
relationships between items telling some aspect of  
Human behaviour, usually buying behaviour for determining 
items that customers buy together. All  
 
 
Rules of this type describe a particular local pattern. The 
group of association rules can be easily interpreted and 
communicated. 
 
 
Manuscript received June, 2013. 
 Charanjeet Kaur, Department of Computer Engineering, Yadawindra 
College of Engineering, Talwandi Sabo, Punjabi University, Patiala,  
Bathinda, India.s 
II. ASSOCIATION RULES 
 
In Association Rule mining find rules that will predict the 
occurrence of an item based on the occurrence of the other 
items in the transaction. Table shows Market-Basket 
Transactions 
 
TID Items 
1 Bread, Milk 
2 Bread, Diaper, Beer, Eggs 
2 Milk , Diaper, Beer, Coke 
4 Bread, Milk, Diaper, Beer 
5 Bread, Milk, Diaper, Coke 
 
Example of Association Rules: 
{Diaper} → {Beer}, 
{Bread, Milk} → {Egg, Coke}, 
{Bread, Beer} → {Milk}, 
Implication means co-occurrence, not causality. Association 
rule is an implication expression of the form X →Y, where X 
and Y are itemsets. 
Example: {Milk, Diaper} → {Beer} 
 
Rule Evaluation: 
 
• Support (S): Fraction of transactions that contain 
both X and Y. 
 
• Confidence (C): Measures how often items in Y 
appear in transactions that contain X. Example: 
{Milk, Diaper} → {Beer} 
S = σ ({Milk, Diaper, Beer}) / [T] 
S = 2/5 S = 0.4 
C = σ ({Milk, Diaper, Beer} / σ ({Milk, Diaper} 
S = 2/3 S = 0.67 
 
• Itemset: A collection of one or more items. Example 
{Milk, Diaper, Beer}. K-itemset that contains 
k-items. 
 
• Frequent Itemset: An itemset whose support is 
greater than or equal to a min_sup threshold. In 
association rule mining task from a set of 
transactions T, the goal of association rule mining is 
to find all rules having Support >= min_sup 
threshold and Confidence>= min_conf threshold. 
Association Rule Mining using Apriori 
Algorithm: A Survey 
Charanjeet Kaur 
 
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 2, Issue 6, June 2013 
 
All Rights Reserved © 2013 IJARCET 
2082 
 
There are two phases in the problem of data mining 
association rules. 
 
1. Find all frequent itemsets: i.e. all itemsets that 
have support s above a predetermined minimum 
threshold. 
2. Generate strong association rules from the 
frequent itemsets: these association rules must 
have confidence c above a predetermined 
minimum threshold. 
After the large item sets are identified, the corresponding 
association rules can be derived in a 
relatively straightforward manner. Thus the overall 
Performance of mining association rules is determined 
primarily by the first step. Efficient counting of large itemsets 
is thus the focus of most association rules mining algorithms. 
 
III. APRIORI ALGORITHM 
Apriori algorithm is, the most classical and important 
algorithm for mining frequent itemsets, proposed by 
R.Agrawal and R.Srikant in 1994. Apriori is used to find all 
frequent itemsets in a given database DB. The key idea of 
Apriori algorithm is to make multiple passes over the 
database. It employs an iterative approach known as a 
breadth-first search (level-wise search) through the search 
space, where k-itemsets are used to explore (k+1)-itemsets. 
The working of Apriori algorithm is fairly depends upon the 
Apriori property which states that” All nonempty subsets of a 
frequent itemsets must be frequent”. It also described the anti 
monotonic property which says if the system cannot pass the 
minimum support test, all its supersets will fail to pass the 
test. Therefore if the one set is infrequent then all its supersets 
are also frequent and vice versa. This property is used to 
prune the infrequent candidate elements. In the beginning, 
the set of frequent 1-itemsets is found. The set of that 
contains one item, which satisfy the support threshold, is 
denoted by L. In each subsequent pass, we begin with a seed 
set of itemsets found to be large in the previous pass. This 
seed set is used for generating new potentially large itemsets, 
called candidate itemsets, and count the actual support for 
these candidate itemsets during 
The pass over the data. At the end of the pass, we determine 
which of the candidate itemsets are actually large (frequent), 
and they become the seed for the next pass. Therefore, L  is 
used to find L!, the set of frequent 2-itemsets, which is used 
to find L , and so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be 
found. The basic steps to mine the frequent elements are as 
follows: ·  
• Generate and test: In this first find the 1-itemset 
frequent elements L by scanning the database and 
removing all those elements from C which cannot 
satisfy the minimum support criteria. 
• Join step: To attain the next level elements Ck join 
the previous frequent elements by self join i.e. Lk-1* 
Lk-1  known as Cartesian product of Lk-1 . I.e. This 
step generates new candidate k-itemsets based on 
joining Lk-1 with itself which is found in the 
previous iteration. Let Ck denote candidate 
k-itemset and Lk be the frequent k-itemset. 
• Prune step: Ck is the superset of Lk so members of Ck 
may or may not be frequent but all K ' 1 frequent 
itemsets are included in Ck thus prunes the Ck to find 
K frequent itemsets with the help of Apriori 
property. I.e. This step eliminates some of the 
candidate k-itemsets using the Apriori property A 
scan of the database to determine the count of each 
candidate in Ck would result in the determination of 
Lk (i.e., all candidates having a count no less than 
the minimum support count are frequent by 
definition, and therefore belong to Lk). Ck, however, 
can be huge, and so this could involve grave 
computation. To shrink the size of Ck, the Apriori 
property is used as follows. Any (k-1)-itemset that is 
not frequent cannot be a subset of a frequent 
k-itemset. Hence, if any (k-1)-subset of candidate 
k-itemset is not in Lk-1 then the candidate cannot be 
frequent either and so can be removed from Ck. Step 
2 and 3 is repeated until no new candidate set is 
generated. 
 
It is no doubt that Apriori algorithm successfully finds the 
frequent elements from the database. But as the 
dimensionality of the database increase with the number of 
items then: 
• More search space is needed and I/O cost will 
increase. 
• Number of database scan is increased thus candidate 
generation will increase results in increase in 
computational cost. 
 
Therefore many variations have been takes place in the 
Apriori algorithm to minimize the above limitations arises 
due to increase in size of database. These subsequently 
proposed algorithms adopt similar database scan level by 
level as in Apriori algorithm, while the methods of candidate 
generation and pruning, support counting and candidate 
representation may differ. The algorithms improve the 
Apriori algorithms by: 
• Reduce passes of transaction database scans 
• Shrink number of candidates 
• Facilitate support counting of candidates 
 
IV. MATH 
In An improved Apriori Algorithm for Association Rules 
of Mining [1] the basic concepts of association rule mining 
and the classical Apriori algorithm is discussed. The idea to 
improve the algorithm is also discussed. The new algorithm 
is made that works on the following technique, firstly, 
separate every acquired data according to discretization of 
data items and count the data while scan the database, 
secondly, prune the acquired item sets. After analysis, the 
improved algorithm reduces the system resources occupied 
and improves the efficiency and quality. 
 
Using distributed apriori association rule and classical 
apriori mining algorithms for grid based knowledge 
discovery [2] the paper presents the implementation of an 
association rules discovery data mining task using Grid 
                                                 
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 2, Issue 6, June 2013 
 
2083 
www.ijarcet.org 
 
 
technologies. A result of implementation with a comparison 
of classic apriori and distributed apriori is also discussed. 
Distributed data mining systems provide an efficient use of 
multiple processors and databases to speed up the execution 
of data mining and enable data distribution. The main aim of 
grid computing is to give organizations and application 
developers the ability to create distributed computing 
environments that can utilize computing resources on 
demand. Therefore, it can help increase efficiencies and 
reduce the cost of computing networks by decreasing data 
processing time and optimizing resources and distributing 
workloads, thereby allowing users to achieve much faster 
results on large operations and at lower costs. In this paper 
distributed apriori association rule on grid based environment 
is mined and the knowledge obtained is interpreted. 
 
 Optimization of association rule mining and apriori 
algorithm Using Ant colony optimization [3].This paper is 
on Apriori algorithm and association rule mining to improved 
algorithm based on the Ant colony optimization algorithm. 
ACO was introduced by dorigo and has evolved significantly 
in the last few years. Many organizations have collected 
massive amount data. This data set is usually stored on 
storage database systems. Two major problems arise in the 
analysis of the information system. One is reducing 
unnecessary objects and attributes so as to get the minimum 
subset of attributes ensuring a good approximation of classes 
and an acceptable quality of classification. Another one is 
representing the information system as a decision table which 
shows dependencies between the minimum subset of 
attributes and particular class numbers without redundancy. 
In Apriori algorithm, is working process explained in steps. 
Two step processes is used to find the frequent item set to 
join and prune. ACO algorithm was inspired from natural 
behaviour of ant colonies. ACO is used to solve to numerous 
hard optimizations including the travelling salesman 
problem. ACO system contains two rules .One is local 
pheromone update rule, which is applied in constructing 
solution. Another one is global pheromone update rule which 
is applied in ant construction.ACO algorithm includes two 
more mechanisms, namely trail evaporation and optionally 
deamonactions.ACO algorithm is used for the specific 
problem of minimizing the number of association rules. 
Apriori algorithm uses transaction data set and uses a user 
interested support and confidence value then produces the 
association rule set. These association rule set is discrete and 
continues. Hence weak rule set are required to prune. 
 
An Improved Apriori Algorithm Based on Pruning 
Optimization and Transaction Reduction [4] elaborates 
the basic ideas and the shortcomings of Apriori algorithm, 
studies the current major improvement strategies of it. The 
improved Apriori algorithm based on pruning optimization 
and transaction reduction is proposed. According to the 
performance comparison in the simulation experiment, the 
number of frequent item sets is much less and the running 
time is significantly reduced as well as the performance is 
enhanced then finally the algorithm is enhanced. 
. 
The Research of Improved Association Rules Mining 
Apriori Algorithm [6] points out the bottleneck of classical 
Apriori’s algorithm, presents an improved association rule 
mining algorithm. The new algorithm is based on reducing 
the times of scanning candidate sets and using hash tree to 
store candidate item sets. According to the running result of 
the algorithm, the processing time of mining is decreased and 
the efficiency of algorithm has improved. 
 
An Improved Apriori Algorithm [5] called 
APRIORI-IMPROVE is proposed based on the limitations of 
Apriori. APRIORI-IMPROVE algorithm presents 
optimizations on 2-items generation, transactions 
compression and uses hash structure to generate L2, uses an 
efficient. 
 
An Improved Apriori-based Algorithm for Association 
Rules Mining [7] elaborates that because of the rapid growth 
in worldwide information, efficiency of association rules 
mining (ARM) has been concerned for several years. In this 
paper, based on the original Apriori algorithm, an improved 
algorithm IAA is proposed. IAA adopts a new count-based 
method to prune candidate itemsets and uses generation 
record to reduce total data scan amount. Experiments 
demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms the original 
Apriori and some other existing ARM methods... 
In this paper, an improved Apriori-based algorithm IAA is 
proposed. Through pruning candidate itemsets by a new 
count-based method and decreasing the mount of scan data 
by candidate generation record, this algorithm can reduce the 
redundant operation while generating frequent itemsets and 
association rules in the database. Validated by the 
experiments, the improvement is notable. This work is part of 
our Distributed Network Behavior Analysis System, though 
we have considered C-R problem in our algorithm, for 
specific dataset, more work is still needed. We also need 
further research to implement this algorithm in our 
distributed system. 
 
 Optimization of Association Rule Mining through 
Genetic Algorithm [8] explains the Strong rule generation is 
an important area of data mining. In this paper authors design 
a novel method for generation of strong rule. In which a 
general Apriori algorithm is used to generate the rules after 
that authors use the optimization techniques. Genetic 
algorithm is one of the best ways to optimize the rules. In this 
direction for the optimization of the rule set they design a 
new fitness function that uses the concept of supervised 
learning then the GA will be able to generate the stronger rule 
set. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
Association rule mining is an interesting topic of research in 
the field of data mining. We have presented a survey of most 
recent research work. However association rule mining is 
still in a stage of exploration and development. There are still 
some essential issues that need to be studied for identifying 
useful association rules. We hope that data mining 
researchers can solve these problems as soon as possible.  
Some problems for association rule mining are suggested 
below:  
 
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 2, Issue 6, June 2013 
 
All Rights Reserved © 2013 IJARCET 
2084 
 
1. To make frequent pattern mining an essential task in data 
mining, much research is needed. 
2. Most approaches are based on some strict assumptions. 
They should be generalized so that they can be more widely 
used.  
3. More efficient and scalable methods for Association Rule 
mining should be developed.  
4. Single scan and online mining methods should be 
developed. 
5. Database-independent measurements should be 
established. 
6. Deep-level association rules should be identified.  
7. Techniques for mining association rules in multi-databases 
should be explored.  
8. Effective techniques for Web Usage Mining should be 
developed.  
9. New applications of association rule mining should be 
explored. 
 
 
                                              REFERENCES 
 
[1]  WEI Yong-qing, YANG Ren-hua, LIU Pei-yu, ”An Improved Apriori 
Algorithm for Association Rules of Mining” IEEE(2009) 
 
[2] Mrs. R. Sumithra, Dr (Mrs). Sujni Paul, “Using distributed apriori 
association rule and classical apriori mining algorithms for grid based 
knowledge discovery”, 2010 Second International conference on 
Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies, IEEE. 
 
[3] Badri patel ,Vijay K Chaudahri,Rajneesh K Karan,YK Rana, 
“Optimization of association rule mining apriori algorithm using Ant 
Colony optimization” International Journal of Soft Computing and 
Engineering (IJSCE) ISSN: 2231-2307, Volume-1, Issue-1, March 
2011. 
 
[4]  Zhuang Chen, Shibang CAI, Qiulin Song and Chonglai Zhu, “An 
Improved Apriori Algorithm Based on Pruning Optimization and 
Transaction Reduction”, IEEE 2011. 
 
[5] Rui Chang, Zhiyi Liu, “An Improved Apriori Algorithm”, 2011 
International Conference on Electronics and Optoelectronics (ICEOE 
2011) 
 
[6] Huiying Wang, Xiangwei Liu, “The Research of Improved Association 
Rules Mining Apriori Algorithm” 2011 Eighth International 
Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD). 
 
[7]  Huan Wu, Zhigang Lu, Lin Pan, Rongsheng Xu, Wenbao Jiang,“ An 
Improved Apriori-based Algorithm for Association Rules Mining”, 
Sixth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge 
Discovery, IEEE Society community, 2009. 
 
[8] Rupali Haldulakar, Prof. Jitendra Agrawal,“ Optimization of 
Association Rule Mining through Genetic Algorithm”, International 
Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE), Vol. 3, Issue. 
3, Mar 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHIES:-  
 
 
 
Charanjeet Kaur received her B.Tech degree in Computer 
Engineering from the Yadawindra College of Engineering,  
Guru Kashi Campus, Talwandi Sabo(Bathinda) affiliated to 
Punjabi University , Patiala(Punjab) in 2011, and pursuing 
M.Tech degree in Computer Engineering from Yadawindra 
College of Engineering, Talwandi Sabo (Bathinda). 
Currently, she is doing her thesis work on Optimization of 
Apriori Algorithm  using Ant Colony Optimization. Her 
topic of interest is Data Mining.  
